 C00015341
 xnrom?fAL
 Deputy Assistant Director/SI
 Acting Chief, Weapons & logid.l=ent Division
 "Flying Saucers"
 1.  Pursuant to ycur request cr overall ervalnotion of "shying
 saucers" and asst star repasts, the following is pertinent:
 a. Of loco to 2000 such reports received by /TIC, a
 large pcrcentaae are clearly "phoney".  An equally large
 percentarre can be satisfactorily a mined as known flights
 of currently operational U.S. equipment (ain't,. water
 balloons, etc.) and -mV othere are u.' oubtedly of natural
 pbena-etaa (aotearites, clout", aberration of light caused
 by thereat inversion or reflections, etc.).
 b. Less than 1C0 reasoneb2;- credible. reports remain
 ai? able" at this tine; regarding these reports,
 there is no pattern of specific sizes, canfU-Jratiors,
 c~sactcristics, perfo:  ace, or location. The sources
 of '?hese re:. arts are generally no more or less credible
 than the sources of the other categories. It is probable
 that if conplete.frfor ation were available far, presently
 a=ezpls?aable" reports, they, too, could be  rlu tc into
 categories as'iardicated in "a" above.
 2. rots:ithsta-.ding the foregoing tentative facts, so long as
 a series of reports re_rains ";unexplainable" (iaterp}anetazy aspects
 and yes origin not bairn, t'hnroughly ern uded from condicderstion)
 ewaticn requires that inteUL? ence continue coverage of the subject.
 3.  It is reco=aaded that Cli aurvolllanco of subject ratter,
 in coo= i.ration vdta ;never authorities of prinery operational concern
 at ATIC, be cog; iausd.  It is stront;1I urCed, ha?    , that no indication,
 of Cab interact or concern roach the press or public, in view of their
 probable ofern st tendencies to accept such interest as "confirmatory"
 of the sass of "unpublished facts" in the brads of the U. S.
 Govt.
 4.  The vniersin;.cd has erran'ed with the Cc  u3irg officer or
 the P.i ^_sa-b?nicol Iatalli,ezce Center at tiri ht-Pattorron Air Force
 Base, Chic, for a thcrouCh and cotspreheensive briefing related to this
 subject an 8 lrurrost 1952. Subsce. ent to obtr-inia? full details, a
 detailed aza;rzis will be prepared and foruarded.

