 000175737
 Page: 1     of 10
 Concatenated JPRS Reports, 1993
 Document 2 of 4                                                 Page   1
 Classification:   UNCLASSIFIED       Status:        [STAT]
 Document Date:    01 Dec 92          Category:      [CAT]
 Report Type:      JPRS report        Report Date:
 Report Number:    JPRS-UAC-93-006    UDC Number:
 Author(s):  Lieutenant Colonel V. Maksimovskiy: "A New `Perpetual'
 Engine?"]
 Headline:  Theory of More Efficient Propulsion Method Explored
 Source Line:  93UM0447G Moscow AVIATSIYA I KOSMONAVTIKA in Russian No
 12, Dec 92 (signed to press 23 Nov 92) pp 32-33
 Subslug:  [Article by Lieutenant Colonel V. Maksimovskiy: "A New
 `Perpetual' Engine? " ]
 FULL TEXT OF ARTICLE:
 1.  [Article by Lieutenant Colonel V. Maksimovskiy: `'A New
 `Perpetual' Engine?"]
 2.  [Text] There are examples in the history of science of
 revolutionary discoveries by persons working alone which give impetus
 to a more precise definition of fundamentally new knowledge, the
 development of directions for application, and the creation of
 equipment which serves man firsthand. The- pacer evolution--------
 gradually declining.  But this is where a new fundamental discovery
 usually follows and the cycle is repeated.
 3.  In our time, man needs to make use of more and more energy. But
 in doing this, he ruins his own environment.  All the well-known
 methods of surmounting the crisis that has developed are based on
 traditional approaches, and taking into account the sluggishness of
 our consciousness, they may turn out to be insufficiently effective
 or overdue for that reason. But there are persons capable of getting
 "off the beaten path" and suggesting alternatives which go beyond
 the limits of established conceptions. The bearers of these ideas are
 often eminent scientists, and they must have irrefutable arguments to
 support new theories. The pioneers follow a long and thorny path for
 this reason. We will acquaint our readers with one of these persons
 and his ideas.
 4.  V. Shabetnik, senior scientific associate of the NPO [Scientific
 Production Association] of Experimental Machine Building and
 candidate of technical sciences, suggests that airborne vehicles
 using a unique means of propulsion be built. Craft such as these will
 not need hydrocarbon fuels.
 5.  Two `Whales' [scientific progenitors]
 JJH
 UNCLASSIFIED          Approved for Release
 '000175737
 Page: 2     of 10
 Concatenated JPRS Reports, 1993
 Document 2 of 4                                                  Page   2
 6.  Vasiliy Dmitriyevich long ago set himself the task of finding a
 means of doing without the use of thermal energy in engines by
 converting the energy from an on-board source directly into
 performance. The point is that the disorganized thermal movement of
 molecules in a working fluid cannot be completely regulated by
 organizing the process of its discharge in rocket or jet engines, and
 thrust is created in them very inefficiently for this reason.
 Shabetnik came to the conclusion that Tsiolkovskiy's formula is
 similar to Boltzmann's formula, which characterizes the entropy of a
 system and confirms the need for very high expenditures of energy to
 boost rockets to high speeds. Indeed, the useful load eliminated in
 low near-earth orbit makes up only 2 to 4 percent of the initial mass
 of a booster rocket. This conclusion applies to all engines which
 utilize the energy of discharged masses to create thrust, including
 plasma, ions, and photons. But if we are referring to manned flights
 beyond the solar system, when much greater speeds must be reached,
 there are serious doubts about the possibility of realizing them.
 7.  First of all, Shabetnik came to the conclusion that the
 fundamental subatomic particles (electrons, protons, and neutrons),
 as well as photons, have a structure that is quite specific. This
 conflicts with the assumptions of quantum physics and the
 statistical, random concepts of matter. But it was precisely such an
 approach that made it possible to evaluate the phenomenon of
 superconductivity in a completely untraditional way and to arrive at
 the creation of high-temperature superconducting materials. Their use
 makes it possible to eliminate the losses of electric energy and to
 develop fundamentally new devices.
 8.  Second, an innovator had established and explained the phenomenon
 of energy conversion. Back in 1959, our scientist P. Oshchepkov
 conducted an experiment: he sent current through a semiconductor and
 measured the heat release. It turned out that 2.19 times more thermal
 energy is obtained than if electrical energy is used. At the same
 time, the phenomenon was not explained. Shabetnik determined the
 conditions under which several times as much energy is obtained
 through the internal energy of a substance than is conducted to a
 device.  Thus, he considers a fourfold increase in it to be
 technologically feasible. And this makes it possible to create an
 energy generator.
 10.  How does Shabetnik visualize the configuration of a spacecraft?
 In his opinion, a hull spherical in shape is best suited for flights
 in outer space. It should be covered entirely with a layer of
 superconductive material (in the jargon of physicists, this is called
 C00175737
 Page: 3     of 10
 Concatenated JPRS Reports, 1993
 Document 2 of 4                                                 Page   3
 "Muhammad's coffin"). No less than three accelerators of
 high-velocity electrons will be positioned inside the hull, closer to
 the envelope. The accelerators should have the opportunity to move
 along the "equator" of the spacecraft. One of the atomic reactors
 which have already operated in space may be used as the on-board
 source of energy. However, if a generator invented by the author of
 this suggestion is used, the entire system becomes completely safe
 and ecologically clean. Only one initial --charge- of electricity
 will be needed from the generator, which will be developing energy by
 utilizing the effect of energy conversion mentioned and the
 continuous currents in the semiconductor. With an excess in the
 amount of energy obtained which is four times the amount consumed and
 accelerators with KPD [efficiency] equivalent to 30 percent, this
 generator should produce 20 percent of the energy "pumped in"
 initially.
 11.  Operation of the System
 12.  The high-velocity electrons emitted by the accelerators "fly
 out" of the spacecraft along the superconducting envelope and induce
 an electrical current in it which supplies the generator. The
 movement takes place through the interaction of this induced current
 and another current-the flow of those same electrons that were
 emitted. An ampere force is developed that is proportionate to the
 product of force from the currents and th area of the sem1con uc or
 interacting with the field of electron flow and inversely
 proportionate to the distance between the currents. This distance is
 very small, because the electrons are moving along the length of the
 envelope. So "Muhammad's coffin" flies as if it were repelled by
 the magnetic field created outside the spacecraft by the
 high-velocity electrons being emitted.  The thrust is perpendicular
 to the direction of their movement. By controlling this movement and
 increasing the current, the direction and speed of flight may be
 controlled.
 13.  The inventor is convinced that such a craft does not constitute
 a closed system together with the electrons.  After all, they are
 "ejected" by the accelerators into the surrounding space, and by
 creating a magnetic field and inducing current in the superconducting
 envelope, they do not belong to the spacecraft. That is, in his
 opinion, this is not a suitable analogy to the story about
 Munchhausen pulling himself out of a bog by his hair-the laws of
 physics apply.
 15.  So the acceleration that such a spacecraft can achieve in space
 depends on the area of the superconductor's surface and the capacity
 .C00175737
 Page: 4     of 10
 Concatenated JPRS Reports, 1993
 Document 2 of 4                                                  Page   4
 of the on-board accelerators (and of course, the external
 gravitational force of celestial bodies). If it flies at an
 acceleration equal to that of the earth, the craft will reach a speed
 close to the speed of light in less than a year. The craft will
 continue in free flight into the vicinity of the planetary system or
 star being studied and then it will decelerate. This is how we may
 travel through the galaxy, resolving the problem of weightlessness
 for astronauts at the same time.
 16.  Some readers will think this is another fantasy like the
 "perpetual- engine. This is not surprising-a completely normal
 reaction. But does the author only have ideas? Of course not!
 Realizing how difficult it will be to defend his theory and believing
 it necessary to achieve recognition in scientific circles right away,
 Vasilly Dmitriyevich adopted a flexible tactic. He delivered papers
 at Gagarin and Tsiolkovskiy lectures and certain scientific
 conferences and filed claims for the invention. By working in a
 sectorial NPO, he made his work noticed by high scientific officials,
 and they have not hindered him. Now there are published works, and
 they are known here and abroad. Nov we cannot pretend that there is
 no theory.
 18.  But how is practice a criterion for truth? An~prac ce alrea1y
 exists. Persons were found at the NPO EM [Experimental Machine
 Building Scientific Production Association], including managers such
 as V. Pallo (he is the chairman of the enterprise's Astronautics
 Federation Committee), who considered it expedient to conduct
 experiments to verify the new principles that had been set forth.
 These tests were held in March and May this year. The work was put
 into the official records of the respected organization and a movie
 was made. The behavior of models of high-temperature superconducting
 materials of the Y-Ba-Cu-O type was studied when joined to a hull in
 which electrodes had been arranged. A pulse (about 7 ns) of
 electrical current (about 150 amperes) was fed to them, bringing
 about the flow of electrons. The models were placed in tanks with
 liquid nitrogen, since the effect of superconductivity appears at
 that temperature. The last test was most significant: a
 superconductor 1.7 square centimeters in area developed a force of
 more than 22.5 grams. It was 1.5 millimeters thick and had a mass of
 2 grams.
 19.  In addition, the high-temperature superconducting material that
 Shabetnik developed is undergoing an official test.
 20.  What conclusions have the researchers drawn? First of all, that
 the principles set forth by the author are correct.  Secondly, in the
 C00175737
 Page: 5     of 10
 Concatenated JPRS Reports, 1993
 Document 2 of 4                                                  Page   5
 near future it will be necessary to complete refinement of individual
 assemblies, conduct a synthesis of new high-temperature
 superconducting materials, and begin development of an airborne
 vehicle prototype with a diameter of up to 5 meters and a mass of up
 to 5 metric tons.
 22.  Many other obstacles have not been surmounted yet, of course,
 but the matter is worth active study. It is necessary to be convinced
 once and for all of the validity of this means of propulsion. Our
 country has indisputable priority here. And if the author is correct
 in obtaining materials with a superconducting effect at temperatures
 of over 800 degrees C., such means of transportation may be developed
 for trips at the earth's surface: not only instead of motor vehicles,
 locomotives, and diesel vessels, but airplanes as well. New booster
 rockets may make their appearance. There will be advanced,
 ecologically clean means of transportation. But for the present, the
 manufacture of spacecraft is the most practicable.  Aside from other
 advantages, if these craft are spherical in shape, they are protected
 by their field from most meterorites.
 23.  It is interesting that models in the experiment moved like
 "flying saucers." Movements and changes in direction were
 instantaneous. Who knows, perhaps V. Shabetnik has unrave ed their
 secret (if one exists). But this is not important if such devices
 make their appearance.  We ourselves may become inhabitants of
 another planet to someone else, and our earth will become cleaner and
 more suitable for human life. Why hurry to migrate to other planets
 and space stations? After all, the sun will be shining for everyone
 even longerl
 24.  COPYRIGHT: "Aviatsiya i kosmonavtika,",1992.

