 -000175462
 Page: 12    of 13
 CLAS UNCLASSIFIED
 CLAS UNCLASSIFIED
 AFSN PM1312092993
 COAT 931208
 SLIM Moscow Ostankino Television First Channel Network in Russian 1800 GMT 8
 Dec 93
 RUTH Oleg Shommer and Mikhail Goltsev, identified by caption
 SUBS [From the "Novosti" newscast: Video report from Saratov by Oleg Shommer
 and Mikhail Goltsev, identified by caption
 SUBJ Saratov Committee To Prioritize Industrial Investment
 Full Text Superzone of Message
 1    ]
 2    [Text] [Shommer over video of unique flying apparatus) What is stopping
 this "flying saucer" from taking off?  This is a unique design of the
 Saratov aviation plant, the only apparatus of its kind in the country.
 This fundamentally new craft combines the functions of wing and fuselage.
 Its payload is almost half its own weight.  It does not depend on weather
 conditions, nor does it need airports.
 3    And who is denying oxygen to the creators of this super-modern medical
 equipment -- artificial breathing and circulation apparatus, and
 diagnostic equipment?  It meets Western standards and is frequently
 superior to foreign models.  But, for the time being, these are no more
 than exhibition models.
 4    [Yu. Kitov, mayor of Saratov, identified by caption] We have the
 equipment, the people, and the technologies.  The only thing that is
 lacking is money.
 5    [Shower] Yet without money production of this new equipment cannot be
 launched.  Defense complex enterprises, which are currently going through
 hard times, account for more than 80 percent of total industrial output in
 Saratov.  The city authorities are proposing to find funds locally in
 order back up the defense industry and organize conversion.  A special
 management coordination body, an industry committee, has been set up.  The
 most promising development programs are given priority.  The main hopes
 are being pinned on the local self-government clause contained in the new
 draft constitution.  [video shows conversion output] (endall) 081800
 13/1103z dec WC 250 BT #9965 NNNN
 ~ 33
 Approved f r Release

