 000174876
 Page: 5     of 18
 FBIS Concatenated Daily Reports, 1991
 Document 3 of,9                                              Page   1
 Classification:   UNCLASSIFIED       Status;       (STAY]
 Docueent Date:    15 Jan 91          Category:     [CAT]
 Report Type:      Daily Report       Report Date:
 Report Number:    FBIS-SOV-91-015    iTDC Number:
 Headline:  Alternative Uses for Krasnoyarsk Site Suggested
 Source Line:  91UM0278A Moscow RABOCHAYA TRIBUNA in Russian 15 Jan 91
 p Z
 Subslug:  [ "Readers' Letters in Response to RABOCHAYA TRIBUNA
 Article Published on 9 October: `Hitting a Secret
 Installation With a Sledgehammer " '--RABOCHAYA TRIBUNA
 headline]
 FULL TE%T OP ARTICLE:
 1.  [ "Readers' Letters in Response to RABOCHAYA TRIBUNA Article
 Published on 9 October: `Hitting a Secret Installation With a
 Sledgehammer " '--RABOCHAYA TRIBUNA headline]
 2.  [Text] At the time of publication of Military Observer N.
 Panyukov's letter  "Hitting a Secret Installation With a
 Sledgehammer,"  which described the  "sad fate "  of the Krasnoyarsk
 Radar Station, the editors expressed their willingness to bring
 proposals for a sensible use of its  "remains "  out for public
 discussion. We feel that this topic has touched our readers deeply.
 We have already received over a 100 letters. We offer some of them to
 our readers today.
 4.  In my line of service, I have been involved in things related to
 radars for many years. Therefore, it is especially painful for me to
 read that, because of elementary illiteracy, such horrendous things
 are being done. Really, it is as they say: There is no limit to human
 stupidity while its mind is limited. What is it that scared the
 Americans so much in the Krasnoyarsk radar that our politicians did
 not have any choice other than to destroy it?
 5,  Do we not have enough highly qualified specialists in our country
 to help the politicians prove to the Americans-- currently our
 friends--that this  "secret object,"  as well as any other radar
 station, may be used for purposes that are not necessarily of a
 military nature? This is an irreplaceable base for space,
 geophysical, astronomical, and many other types of research.
 Meanwhile, we, without studying the situation in detail, rush to grab
 the sledgehammer and crush an object into which hundreds of millions
 of people's money was invested, and which has expensive equipment
 Approved for Release   iQ
 ~  ~(?
 000174876
 Page: 6     of 18
 FBIS Concatenated Daily Reports, 1991
 Document 3 of 9
 integrated in it....
 6.  [Signed] V. Matsoshev, Moscow
 7.  AHY AR$ AMBRICANS AFRAID OF US?
 Page   2
 8.  Quite possibly, our politicians had been counting on reciprocity.
 That the Americans would dismantle or mothball their radar stations,
 at least on the foreign territories--in Greenland and in Great
 Britain. After all, this is also an ABM treaty violation. Alas!
 Nothing happened. All American radars continue to operate.
 9.  I agree with that 75-years old taiga inhabitant and war veteran,
 Roman Yegorovich Nebylitsa, who had proposed to turn this radar
 station into a retransmission station. Perhaps, it can be put to some
 other use. We should not destroy it, though....
 10.  [Signed] V. Formanchuk, Moscow
 12.  I am shaken by what is going on. This is not 3ust a dismantling
 of a radar station, it is a crime. By profession I am a construction
 engineer. That is probably why I feel this pain.
 13.  I propose that we stop demolishing the structures and conduct
 negotiations, for instance, with the people who live in the Chernobyl
 catastrophe area. I am convinced that many will agree to move there.
 Perhaps from other regions as well. If there is good land there,
 grazing land, mellifluous meadows for bee-keeping, or fish.... Why
 not live there? There will always be work for people.
 14.  [Signed] V. Nyavnyko, Skulyany settlement, SSR [Soviet SocialisC
 Republic] Moldova
 16.  Judging by your publication, the area where this  "miracle on
 the Yenisey high road "  is located is beautiful. And it seems that
 the settlement is quite modern. With high-rise buildings and
 comfortable apartments. It is Yenisey, after all. It is Russia
 itself.
 17.  Perhaps, we should start building a new capital of Siberia
 there?
 18.  [Signed] S. Polyakova, Moscow
 000174876
 Page: 7     of 18
 PBIS Concatenated Daily Reports, 1991
 Document 3 of 9                                              Page   3
 20.  I cannot understand: Is it not known to everybody that the radar
 station by itself does not kill anybody and does not present any
 threat to other countries? In this sense, Krasnoyarsk Radar Station
 has nothing to do with anything. It is another matter that its
 disappearance will make foreign airplanes and missiles invisible to
 us, and that it strikes another noticeable blow at our already weak
 economy.
 21.  It is easier to demolish that to build.
 22.  [Signed] P. Kulibaba, Pyatigorsk
 23.  WITH THE `SLEDGEHAMMER'...AT THE FATHERLAND
 24.  The problem is that today it is not just the Krasnoyarsk Radar
 Station on which they use the sledgehammer.  They also strike the
 monuments to V.I. Lenin, F.E.  Dzerzhinskiy, and S.M. Kirov. These
 sledgehammers are being used both here and in East Europe. Various
 turncoats also use the moral  "sledgehammer "  to strike at our Army,
 the KGB, and the MVD [Ministry of Internal Affairs].... They do not
 give a damn that our security is hurt by this.
 25.  Now they have also hit the Warsaw Pact with a  "baby
 sledgehammer."  They demand that we close our test sites while the
 tests in Nevada continue.... But what about our national security?
 26.  [Signed] A. Kutin, worker, Leningrad
 28.  I remember how impressed T was when I saw a photo of the
 Krasnoyarsk Radar Station published in a newspaper a year or two ago.
 I remember thinking: Here is such an expensive, electronic, modern
 miracle, and it has to be sacrificed for military needs that do not
 yield any profit for people's economy.
 29.  Now it seems there is no military need for Krasnoyarsk Radar
 Station. Good. But why demolish it? I propose-- perhaps, with the
 participation of foreign experts, as you have mentioned in the
 postface--to use this grandiose complex to set up a center for UFO
 observation and research. Then, perhaps, we will-figure out jointly
 who these  "strange guests "  are and what they want? Perhaps, it will
 also help us solve our numerous earthly problems.  Perhaps, fate
 itself presents the  "Krasnoyarsk object"  with such unique chance.
 Let us think about it.
 UNCLASSIFIED
 000174876
 Page: 8     of 18
 FBI5 Concatenated Daily Reports, 1991
 Document 3 of 9                                              Page   4
 30.  [Signed] Yu. Yefstafyev, Leningrad
 31.  ~7e thank all our readers who responded to the publication, and
 invite everybody to continue this discussion, to offer more
 suggestions. They will be analyzed by a group of specialists who will
 meet here at our editorial offices in the near future to discuss this
 important problem.
 32.  Our telephone number is 257-25-20.
 33.  [Signed) RABOCHAYA TRIBUNA military section

