 C00175712
 Page: 50 '  of 63
 Concatenated JPRS Reports, 1990
 Document 11 of 16                                         Page   1
 Classification:   UNCLASSIFIED       Status:        [STAT]
 Document Date:    01 Jun 90          Category:      [CAT]
 Report Type:      JPRS Report        Report Date:
 Report Number:    JPRS-UAC-90-010    UDC Number:
 Author(s):  Col V. Anuchin, editor in chief of AVIATSIYA I
 KOSMONAVTIKA: "Editor's Column " ]
 Headline:  Editor's Column
 Source Line:  90SVO038B Moscow AVIATSIYA I KOSMONAVTIKA in Russian No
 6, Jun 90 (signed to press 29 Apr 90) p 5
 Subslug:  [Message to the readers by Col V. Anuchin, editor in chief
 of AVIATSIYA I KOSMONAVTIKA: "Editor's Column"]
 FULL TEXT OF ARTICLE:
 1.  [Message to the readers by Col V. Anuchin, editor in chief of
 AVIATSIYA I KOSMONAVTIKA: "Editor's Column " ]
 2.  [Text] Dear Readers! AVIATSIYA I KOSMONAVTIKA is presently
 experiencing a turning point. The editorial staff is faced with an
 important, difficult task: how to restructure our work in such a
 manner that the magazine becomes a friend, adviser and defender for
 those who serve in the Air Force and for --those          n   es   n
 aviation.
 3.  We are fully aware of the fact that AVIATSIYA I KOSMONAVTIKA as
 it was in 1988 and 1989 was far from fully satisfying the interests
 of the aviation professionals among its subscribers. The time has
 come to make a change in direction. What the magazine is to become
 depends in large measure on you, valued readers, on your suggestions
 and recommendations. We therefore urge you to take a few minutes and
 present your view: what would you like to see this magazine become?
 4.  We feel that in the present situation we must conduct a detailed
 discussion of radical restructuring of the system of training used by
 Air Force units and subunits, since in our opinion the old approaches
 to its organization have not only totally outlived their usefulness
 but have even become an impediment on the road toward the heights of
 military expertise. The staff awaits constructive suggestions from
 pilots and navigators, engineers and technicians, scientists and
 teachers, rear services and communications specialist personnel.
 5.  A no less critical item on the agenda is problems pertaining to
 ensuring flight safety. The existing principle of finding the guilty
 parties rather than the causes of air mishaps not only fails to help
 reduce the accident rate but, on the contrary, further aggravates the
 319
 UNCLASSIFIED      Approved for Release
 C00175712
 Page: 51    of 63
 Concatenated JPRS Reports, 1990
 Document 11 of 16                                               Page   2
 situation with falsifications, lies, and insincerity, which attend
 accident investigation. In connection with this, this magazine
 intends to wage a determined campaign to gain legal recognition of a
 pilot's right to make a mistake, and to scrap the archaic stereotype
 used in evaluating the quality of flying performance. As things stand
 at present, however, a pilot is already culpable by virtue of the
 fact that he has taken the controls of a fixed-wing or rotary-wing
 aircraft!
 6.  As we see it, this magazine should carry an extensive discussion
 and debate on how the work of political agencies and party
 organizations can be restructured in a beneficial manner. What
 functions should they perform?  What structure should they have? Many
 questions have accumulated, but at present few sensible answers are
 being received from.the political workers.
 7.  We feel that one of our principal obligations is to wage an
 uncompromising campaign to increase the social and legal protection
 of aviation personnel against despotism by their superiors, against
 disorganization, unwarranted restrictions and unnecessary
 simplifications in combat training, etc.
 8.  In responding to reader requests, AVIATSIYA I KOSMONAVTIKA will
 discuss on a regular basis little-known pages from the history of.
 Soviet and foreign aviation: combat operations- on--the--Khalkhin-Go-----
 River, in the Soviet-Finnish War, in Korea, etc. Materials being
 readied for publication deal with various types of aircraft,
 including those which for various reasons never entered regular
 production. Information on modern foreign aircraft.  This magazine
 will be a one-of-a-kind source of information on the space program,
 on unidentified flying objects, and on puzzling phenomena.
 9.  We need your support today, esteemed readers, more than ever
 before: your advice, active cooperation, constructive criticism and,
 particularly, your subscription, for this magazine has practically no
 newsstand distribution. While counting on your understanding, we in
 turn pledge to help you in every way possible and to live up to your
 expectations. Our strength lies in solidarity and mutual assistance.
 10.  COPYRIGHT: " Aviatsiya i kosmonavtika", 1990.

