 C00175440
 Page: 4     of 4
 CLAS UNCLASSIFIED
 CLAS UNCLASSIFIED
 AFSN LD1811003189
 SUBJ Take 3 of 3 -- Abalkin 15 Nov News Conference
 Full Text Superzone of Message
 1    [Editorial Report] An APN correspondent asks about the difficulty of the
 present state of affairs and whether the population expected to wait.
 2    Abalkin says everyone is waiting for an instant miracle.  In the past, he
 says, it is at times like this that reports of UFO's start circulating.
 We must convince public opinion, by means of the truth and nothing but the
 truth.  Huge disappointments are inevitable after huge illusions.  The
 unfortunate must be made aware of the state's concern for their
 well-being.  We must not give way to emotions.  The individual must be
 made to feel his own responsibility and the importance of this work.  The
 republics must be given their chance: In 1990 they must be zones of
 change; they must show that things are changing for the better.
 3    An ABC correspondent, speaking in English with superimposed Russian
 translation, asks: "President Bush has said that he wants perestroyka to
 succeed.  What steps would you like the United States to take in the
 economic sphere to help perestroyka succeed?"
 4    Abalkin responds: "We must do most of the work ourselves.  I remember what
 Bush said about Poland and Hungary.  He was quite right, I think, when he
 said, as a wise and realistic politician, that the Poles and Hungarians
 themselves must bring their country out of economic crisis, just like the
 Soviet people must do.  We must do this ourselves.  I am concerned most by
 what must be done in our country in these matters.  As for what can be
 expected of the United States of America, which might be of assistance, I
 do not wish to develop this topic, because apart from the most general
 concepts with which you have all long been familiar -- decide the issue of
 the most-favoured nation system, remove some other restrictions -- I shall
 not be enriching our knowledge with anything."
 5    The (?Harlems Daglad) correspondent, speaking in Russian, asks: "We did
 not all manage to follow the debates conducted at the conference.  Could
 you perhaps tell us more specifically which points gave rise to the most
 negative reaction from the conservatives, and how do you reckon to break
 this opposition?"
 6    Abalkin answers: "We have a great deal of historical experience on how to
 break the opposition.  [laughter in hall] Therefore, the main task is how
 to learn to hold a dialogue with the opposition.  The best way is to
 compel the conservatives to do battle with the radicals, while we get on
 calmly with the job at hand.  [laughter] That would be the wisest
 solution, we have both radicals and conservatives.  At the same time, we
 must take all the valuable and useful and sensible things offered by both
 of these, and include these in our programme and get on along our own way.
 As for the aspects which came in for criticism, I would limit myself to
 just two approaches.  Emotions carried over from meetings were present at
 the conference; and there were also scientific discussions.
 7    "Everything starts at the very beginning: Should state-.property be left
 unaltered, or should we start to modernize and renew, make it more
 flexible and start the process of de-etatization, given labor collectives
 on this basis the freedom to decide matters independently and to elect
 their manager.  Or should we maintain the system of administration by
 injunction.  Should we move to a market with new laws of regulating it,
 with flexible and mobile prices.  Or should we as before keep prices
 unambiguously under harsh state control.  A quite normal process is under
 way, not a very pleasant one, but a normal process of counterposing and
 weighing up and so forth.  At the same time -- and this is also a very
 Document 6
 rob
 Approved for Release
 'OIL
 COO 17 5 4 4 O own thing -- the existence of any opposition compels one to sharpen
 ones instruments of argument, compels one to weigh up more attentively
 the. possible consequences, which might be overlooked were there no such
 criticism.  Altogether, in the final analysis, if there is no destructive
 action and no struggle, one can derive useful things from this, if one
 regards taking account of diverse points of view as a factor making it
 possible to ensure a more realistic program of action.
 8    "Thank you for the interest you have shown in the work of our conference
 and in our commission's work.  Thank you." (ENDALL) 171903~^
 18/0106Z NOV BT #6143 NNNN

