 C00042351
 English Summaries of Major Ankles
 ttrtl7tlflllh .tfrwrw ,1:if1(!iI }' .i/Jf f AFR1Al in
 Effaw err 4. JaJ..iatj Attlrgr
 KIIIN ='   i.,
 countries the mate actively influence Ike
 iXINTRIES OF ASIA: STATE POLICY
 aNocatioe Of investments. Vaiaigg of qualified
 jWin the necessity of prioritary development of sci-
 "encr- and capital-intensive branches which would pay
 flbr themselves in the long run. developing countries or
 Asia finally succeed in finding such acompromise solu-
 tion that foregoes in the long-term perspective a join of
 increasing quantities of living and materialized labour.
 i.e. is based on combination of labour-, capital- and
 science-intensive productions and intended for well-
 balanced growth of small-scale, big capitalist and state
 sectors.
 From this point. the experience of Asian countries is ors
 certain importance for developing small (in particular.
 co-operative) sector in the USSR. The recently adopted
 laws on the state enterprise. the cooperation and the
 individual labour activities meant a legal acknowledge-
 ment of such objective reality as the multi-sector nature
 of Soviet economy. However, the perestroyka in general
 has not shaken the monopoly or state property, and this
 makes possible negative processes in economy to grow
 without hindrance. The state sector still stays apart from
 any competition. Only secondary roles are still assigned
 to co-operative and self-employed workers. In the
 existing conditions they art not able to organise any
 important production while co-operators could success-
 fully ensure. for instance, a small-series production of
 mini-tractors, mini-combinm electronic equipment and
 electrotechnial devices, as well as the small enterprises
 perform this function in practically all countries of Asia.
 But this way is still firmly blocked by a deep-rooted
 dogma in our consciousness that proclaimed the state
 property to he a prior the height of perfection.
 STANDARD OF NON-CAPITALIST DEVELOP.
 MENT
 M.A.4*.*MOV
 One could not deny that the building of socialism in
 osaljot.ly of socialist-oriented states was realized under
 dard for young sates of the "Wind world." However.
 these works were completely out of touch with reality.
 ignoring existing problems and difficulties. But recently.
 JPltS-t lA-NI-ottt
 It January 1991)
 wire" nmar. onus distortions of socialist principles in
 Soviet As#* n republics came to light, they pa r rlL-d many
 iiteoritdbfsocial sciences and party um orkers, unmasked
 complexity and contradictions of the real socialism and
 *s ways.
 to the author"s opinion, we should admit that problems
 actually tbeed by The republics of Central Asia and
 Kazakhstan are similar to those of developing countries
 of the Eat (to some extent this includes also countries
 which develop ton the capitalist way). Dangers that
 'Eirtaeaten these peoples in general are connected with
 accelerated path of historical development, negative
 influence of the whale rnderdevelopttent in the pre-
 socialist period. the heritage of feudalism. The article
 scrutinizes a key problem of this heritage--the conser-
 vation and functioning of the traditional society in
 Soviet Asian republics.
 The socialism built under Stalin's direction was itself a
 model of feudal community. Its features were pater-
 nalism. hierarchic and caste structure. use of a powerful
 compulsion machinery. In Central Asian republics the
 hierarchy ofStalin's socialism joined the hierarchy of the
 old feudal system. Institutes of traditional society which
 still remain attractive for masses. in the epoch of stag-
 nation became a good camouflage for money-grubbing
 and corruption. Forcibly spread wage-levelling also con-
 tributed to the conservation of the feudal type commu-
 nity. The wage-levelling of the barrack-like socialism was
 close by nature to the feudal levelling and therefore
 easily took root in mass conscience.
 AFRICA. DIFFERENT ORIENTATIONS AND
 COMMON PROBLEMS. ON SOCIAL AND E('O.
 NOMIC POLICY IN COUNTRIES OF ALTERNA-
 TIVE ORIENTATIONS
 Scepticism towards possibilities of socialist-oriented
 policy in developing c ountnes, which became wide.
 spread lately among Soviet researchers, is a stn of
 retroactive reaction to the overestimated realities in the
 past. However, considering the capitalist and the
 socialist orientations of development we should not
 exaggerate their difference. which is strict enough in the
 political and ideological field but is less important in the
 social and economic sphere. This is quite natural.
 because the main tasks of overcoming backwardness
 faced by developing countries are similar trout identical.
 Their essence is the accelerated creation of the potential
 far this overcoolin& all possible development of produc-
 tive forces, both material and human. This circumstance
 inevitably reduces the social and economic difference
 between the two alternative lines to non-significant
 variations in proportions of certain aims and methods of
 policy in countries of both orientations at the present
 000042351
 - ~ ~         M~ht'Ie a0/ aerenarily predorniaatu. sad the i=ltaeaa and Within, /Cflpta. They include special reli-
 S                                    of political leaders in a historical need for " sious; texts (prayers, hymns, iasttuctions and norms or
 S
 F...- ' ? `'!wriara orientation.                     -        a+di ions behavioad as well as literary works (epitaphs.
 wrote ago to conpore tetwlts acbieved in countries of  iclweism and CSri tianity. Tire adoption of Islam by
 at "'building of sociaiiim." This is a long?rtatge '''traditions.
 'lURKISH ASPECTS OF TRUMAN DOCTRINE
 .AND SOME MISTAKES OF STALINIST DIPLO-
 MACY
 In Nte author's opinion. the degradation of social and Southern apd Eastern Siberia. From the 6th century
 p r o nomie situation on the continent in 19i0% connected Turkic peaplles began to form military, political and state
 in (bet mainly with objective factors, cannot be       maim of tribes. On their territories written texts were
 A.Sh. RASIZADE
 While Greek events and the situation about Turkey were
 the occasion to proclaim the doctrine, its Greek and
 Turkish aspects haven't been yet a special subject of
 study in our country. However. the Truman doctrine
 played a crucial role in American Turkish relations. in
 the choiee by Turkey of its place in the post-war world.
 and this influenced. of course. the Soviet Turkish rela-
 dons as well. The principles of the doctrine still stay the
 basis of bilateral relations between Turkey and the USA.
 The author tried to reconsider the Soviet interpretation
 of the Truman doctrine. Now. when we review out past.
 it is awful to show consequences of the wrong approach
 by LV. Stalin and his associates to the Soviet policy in
 the region.
 The Soviet-Turkish relations reached a high level or
 tension during first post-war years. in course of the
 second world war Turkey took in fact an:i-Soviet posi-
 tions. and after the war the Soviet government
 denounced the Treaty on friendship and neutrality
 between the two countries. signed in Paris in 1925, and
 argaested to prepare a new treaty. However. Soviet
 proposals that followed. aggravated even more the bilat-
 eral relations, contributed to the western orientation of
 Turkey. With approval of Stalin. Georgia ant' Armenia
 put in skims on the adjacent parts of Turkish territory.
 In the course of the diplomatic discussion on the regime
 of the Slack Sea straits between USSR. USA. Grat
 Sritaia and Turkey. the Soviet party also raised claims
 unacceptable for the Tarkm which resulted in drawing up
 of a common British-American-Turkish position.
 SYN('RETISM OF Ri LIGK)US AND MYTIIOLOG-
 K AL "INCEPTS OF PRE-MOSLEM TURKS
 I.V. STEBLEVA
 The article deals with insufficiently explored problem of
 various religious and nsib ningical pre-Islam systems
 which functioned among Turkic peoples of Central Asia.
 nssional sad heroic poems. didactic parables and
 novels).
 A most peculiar feature of these works is the interaction--
 of various religious and mythological traditions. Sha.
 manic texts are influenced by the Manichaean religion
 (the tunic fortune-telling book). Manichaan hymns are
 created under the influence of Buddhism. The sgncrc-
 tism of Manichaean and Buddhist ideas and notions
 reaches the level where Mani is identified with Buddha.
 Manichaeism receives as well an impact of Christianity:
 in the prayer addressed to "Mani-Angel (and) Buddha"
 the word equivalent of "magel" means also "apostle."
 Turkic Christian texts were influenced by shamanism
 (the ritual formula of space description) and Man-
 ichaeism which Included in its turn sore features of
 normastrianism.
 SOCIAL AND POLITICAL VIEWS OF ABU-
 L-HASAN AL-MAWARDI (NEW TRENDS OF
 STUDIES)
 A.A. IGNATENKO
 Works created by this eminent Moslem medieval lawyer.
 expert on problems of the state, have been studied for a
 long time by orientalists. Modern Islamists interpret the
 heritage ofal-111awardi, this distinguished theorist of the
 Islamic state-caliphate. as being purely theocratic con-
 cept.
 The notion of "Concord" (w~(/a) takes a key place in his
 concept aimed at giving explanation to the existence and
 functioning of society. This "concord" is necessary for
 people to receive "sufficient matter of their life" in the
 course of "development of the world" (imam). Human
 society Is considered by the medieval theorist to be
 innerly differenti;red: "unity in difference" is a.pre-
 condition of "union" (IWiaf y of people performing var?
 ion functions in the process of -development of the
 world" (tillage. handicraft etc.) and therefore needing
 one somber.
 Mutual hostility inherent in people by nature requires
 the existence of power to consolidate this union using the
 "meligion" (din). AI-Mawardi reconsiders the notion of
 "religion" interpreting it as any set of smiety-..rgniiing      _______
 nomis and rules, including even '?dialnnnesty" lku/r') if it
 C00042351
 pesbrms the function of uniting people. Norms of the
 *Vdigion" interpreted in this way are obligatory bob for
 utlll*ts and the sovereign (wm/fk), the supreme ruler
 t,P.t lw.i- to take mea  n to ensure the community lik.
 09Brick calls in wnnstion he authorship of dtrc
 ' fierittoa to soverewsa wd$.kthrrrth trca.isc wMrsr
 ,}wrrawauscript is kept in the National Library of Paris.
 r :. 'Yaditionally attributed in a1-Mawardi.
 ~,rtOfuE OFSCALES OF TIME AND SPACE IN M(N7-
 f.EU.ING OF HISTORICAL PROCESS
 irOMERANTS
 ?wO
 S
 .
 .
 ~                     'Rationality or irrationality of the history depends to a
 considerable extent on the scale applied to it. This idea
 was put forward in 1724 by F. Kant who noted the trend
 to all-world political unification. F. Schlegel. leaning
 upon the Indian experience. argued that there were no
 planetary time. each great culture went the way than
 revelation to rational constructions leading to a loss or
 creative impulse and to a decline. The model by Kant. in
 the final analysis. can be traced back to Augustus and
 Jewish promise of Messiah. and the model by Schlegel-
 to the Iado?Europan mythologem of four centuries
 (golden, silver, copper and iron). These models are not
 a usually excluding. Total historical movement has a
 complex inner structure including a number of move-
 ments. each of them being evident on a certain scale of
 articulation of historical time and space. 'The article
 distinguishes five scales of the time and the same
 number of scales for the cultural space. On the super-
 hrge sale of Indian mythology, the history in general is
 an illusion and only eternity is real. On a global large
 sale accumulated changes (growth of productive orecs.
 of population. differentiation of society and intellect.
 growing alienation, ecological tension etc.) are first and
 foremost. A middle global scale discerns wave moor
 ments, the "eternal return." the revival of archaic fea-
 tures in the Middle Ages and of the classics in the
 modern history. to Chinese historiography this is
 expressed by an alternation of dynasties is and }nn. On
 a middle local sole the most important are cycles of rise
 and decline of various cultures. These movements, while
 are different enough. can be considered as being
 rorat. easily modelled. They are opposed to explosive
 movements directed by a charismatic leader (M. Weber)
 or a group or"passionaries" (I-N. Gumilyov). Here only
 amhroponorphous sale is possible. There are no tea-
 am to explain Mongolian conquests besides those inter
 laced in Gengis Khan's personality. It is impossible to
 *tacee what new "pussionary" (Hitler. Khomeini) will
 titatratc all plans ofsoher-minded people. However. the
 eaurse of tiase smoothes away traces of explosions and
 as the logic of history is restored to its rights.
 PI-I'm M-M
 a
 JPRS-U[A-PO-001
 to January 190
 Participants: N.A. IVANOV. M.F. VIDYASOVA. L.S.
 VASIIEV. YU.G. ALEKSANDROV. A.D.
 DiKARYOV. V.A. YASHKIN. A.V. AKIMOV
 This RoumiTabk concerns problems ofdeve opment of
 the economic history of the East in the USSR. The article
 by *.M.' ifletrov "New Tasks of Ancient Science and
 Some Materials for Study of Economic History of the
 East" (111$9. No 2) pave rise to the present discussion.
 The participants put the question: what is the reason of
 wh a log in tle field (history of economy) which was
 ;j. baditionally considered by the asarxist science as a
 piorily? A #umber of solutions is wanted. In the
 authors' opinion. use or quantitative methods would
 allow so reject some dogmas which aced a be reviewed.
 e.g. the dogma of the ".robbery" of the East as a source of
 primary capitalist accumulation. The economic back.
 wardness or the East was, first of all. a result of the
 son-ability of etatist economy to ensure the extended
 reproduction, and not that of the "colonial robbery.-
 A negative influence on the East. exerted by the West.
 was rather that the East actively rejected all western
 elements. becoming more and more archaic. However.
 one should not consider that modernization of the
 eastern economy is inevitably to lead to the death of
 traditional structures, preindustrial civilization. The
 study of economic history of the East would help under-
 standing economic problems of the USSP
 Remits orthe study of economic history could be applied
 for forecasting trends in the following fields: global
 problems, studies of economic growth and analysis of
 precedents.
 UNIDENTIFIED FLYING OBJECTS (UFO) IN
 ANCIENT CHINA
 The process of emancipation of thought in China in
 19$0s is particularly impressive after the spiritual
 vacuum of the epoch of "cultural revolution." The thirst
 of the whole society for knowledge based on the eco-
 nomic reforms. takes in a number of cases the form of
 unofficial science. An example of such organisations is
 the scientific societies of UFO fanciers with corre-
 sponding periodicals as the revue "Fcidic Tansuo" .
 ("Studies of Flying Sauces"). The efforts by Chinese
 scientists to read in ancient Chinese sources "historical
 evidences" of UFO' existence are of particular interest
 for Sinologists and experts in science of science. The
 activities of adherents of this new scientific trend in
 China demonstrate methodology and tasks of the Chi-
 nese historical science in general.
 The article considers a number of concrete modern
 versions or interpretation of historical materials on
 extraordinary flying phenomena. A number of works
 criticiping the attempts to place a historical basis under
 this problem, as a rule. does not dispute the main
 modern cnarcept oft SRI asa pnxluct of alien-mind.-
 40
 C00042351
 lW cram
 ins. Adfykr. AN,
 ,111,1
 *0                        A*   FANA  km* 111"r r ~+~r i H a  the .
 Ms     sni
 pt                ifiarrrrilaAsreiaJis~rr
 u
 *an sat*lhts ow l% Sant Sins
 lanrta--din our c+ornrtryr by Nee art
 tt* 'Mr lruontik dl                           w o}fkftlsm
 Is AC I,
 4Md AM ON* CWMW
 S' ?-f+..
 '~fatody Aril i Arnki. Ieaatebtes,
 lays aedakhiya vestochnoy litcrattay.
 L'.
 ILr1-?~gertt,rril
 she~q ion or socialist orientation     he note.
 aplt. ss push or development is t welting      dis-
 f $cs is Oriental studies orb te. Debates that                  held
 M Otis If Mem at the Oriental Studies Insulate nd
 Attics laailate of the USSR Academy of Sciences a
 wa ..bu.rartides published in the pages of the cos
 MARODY AZII I AFRIKI. AZiYA I AFRIKA SE
 ?ODNYA god MIROVAYA EKONOMIKA I M
 DUNAR DNYYE OTNOSHENIYA' confirnt he
 topicality and undeveloped nature    hese
 Flip
 The aoeessibie to researchers; and the opponu
 onese f openly and honestly and to disgl
 fretriee ferny tithe views on the i
 ~` 11'she developing countries that
 path of development.
 s    leans Boi
 l Io be seen that
 :'he majority dike socialist'
 of the USSR.
 as the
 e '' aieitdista and Was~fer
 t- "~' saUdd d d
 ? ~ ~:~fli~ l(tttnt
 "'~~~~Ie~rle er
 mpweas
 sayan
 ore finally
 y to express
 in the press
 aliened a need to
 dircuh problems
 RM
 distanee IV reality. S Silence regarding real Problems
 swd di    tcs and an idealization or the       of
 ling socialism in national regions that      arlier
 hac& 'a -9. When ~aat-ions of the    pies of
 joftisas to taeae stsowMious in         n to be
 tin   subires of the      t. they
 ell tttggr' iNti1 scientists and patty,   en into a
 a~.o.><te+awPPg the wwgwea awn   "MM
 nature of
 ht'1i1 soPtlilisr(t and ways lbulklittg it. of this dictates
 !
 Mrshe Sys  . of dr     n t the
 of
 f W Asiaa.sepaMics rate     bout. The weed
 for i" tacseasdt is ttawt~d.'             one hand. by the
 de_elopmewt weds ter the                  themselves.--since
 *ft-- an diminvT     s d the aitatttion, it is
 impoaRAe so move Blears or so correct' the multitude
 eferroes and omissions have now become tangled in
 a tight Mal of almost . able end. on the
 alter hand. it ;s       fora deepening of our notions
 of eowtemporary    list orientation. since our.former---__
 ideas. founded on  uncritical approach toward Soviet
 experience he      been confirmed by life.
 Olin  street the rubric "Sctriniisat iw
 rPrd of lgart.RVpitdist tae0
 Waeisyr.
 sq swAtr'a""ri'siwim on Chow.
 r drew/ eliding the time of
 we fradal nuwhutd. Le.
 anredane. She strongly
 wrrioa if ewnmaner
 e+artrryansn of the
 led'  the first sera
 i~a   Faurkr and
 -kw
 e. The leveling
 krrlins
 republics
 hugely si
 ootmtr
 relates
 w
 the
 popub
 ikhor r
 adaptation`
 dal-type rte
 inrraaroctme. %
 building of sarialisttt ins averse of debates
 -?     -- __-- -, ._  ?Usbekistan and T
 ga6rag influence from the cape-
 was st
 se model for the building of     .. r,,
 caved to be the standard. The   The aadjority dr
 ~elopbtertt of the Central Asian republics are coming to the comclu%k
 ((
 which did eta undergo the staged                                      `lying we wait fir meialis* re
 taken as the ftundatioa. Mountains d  a new society is tide rmierd
 taco and reeummemkd as a prototype far the
 ltd World caws tries. AN of these weeks. :taw.
 Bred from cage meon shortcomings: as enormous
 towiedged that the problems lacing the
 Central Asia and Kazakhstan today are
 ablar to the dillicattles that the developing
 in the foreign Orient are experiencing (as
 i{iartly so the countries that have closen the
 st development path as well).
 academics had tried to co evince as that the devel-
 t path of the Oriental republics of the USSR
 ifrcn radically from the evolution of the socialist.
 oriented countries of the Orient. Acute conflicts of a
 national, economic. political and cultural nature have
 been detected today. however. that are a consequence of
 e profound processes that we have successfully dosed
 r eyes to over this whole time. Some economists have
 led to acknowledge that Tajikistan. for example, is a
 rang republic with problems that are common to
 rd Woad. They include a high birth rate. i.e. a
 in explosion, and the problem of a surplus of
 aces that is associated with it, as well as the
 pf a traditional society founded on the fcu.
 commune to modern times and the entry
 1 soeial structures into a modern
 e issues hove been raised in the
 at have talcs place in Tajikistan,
 tie and have been reflected in
 prcsL
 paged with these problems
 that the circle or d'%ngers
 lutist and the hw'kfiwg of
 to the pre-s.Kialnt
 ~r'atdalis::a." While
 direct the reader's attention to one of c `le%- elements--

