 C00174743
 Page: 19    of 28
 Concatenated JPRS Reports, 1992 ,
 Document 13 of 20                                                Page   1
 Classification:   UNCLASSIFIED       Status:        [STAT]
 Document Date:    06 Oct 92          Category:      [CAT]
 Report Type:      JPRS report        Report Date:
 Report Number:    FBIS-USR-92-136    UDC Number:
 Author(s):   G. Sapozhnikova, KOMSOMOLSKAYA PRAVDA correspondent:
 "Autumn Double-Dealing: New Turn of Events in
 Russian-Estonian Relations"]
 Source Line:  93UN0051A Moscow KOMSOMOLSKAYA PRAVDA in Russian 6 Oct
 92 p 3
 Subslug:   [Article by G. Sapozhnikova, KOMSOMOLSKAYA PRAVDA
 correspondent: "Autumn Double-Dealing: New Turn of Events
 in Russian-Estonian Relations"]
 FULL TEXT OF ARTICLE:
 1.  [Article by G. Sapozhnikova, KOMSOMOLSKAYA PRAVDA correspondent:
 "Autumn Double-Dealing: New Turn of Events in Russian-Estonian
 Relations-]
 2.  [Text] Autumn in Estonia is quite different than in Russia.
 3.  Tallinn still smells of roses, not poverty. A single Estonian
 kroon, like a single ruble, will buy virtually nothing-just a
 newspaper or a rose, whichever you prefer.  The sweet taste of
 overripe bananas and grilled chicken, the plastic bags bearing store
 logos in brand-name stores, the relatively full shelves and the
 numerous price reductions and sales: Tallinn is becoming a city for
 the rich.  The everyday nationalism in stores has disappeared without
 a trace. Nowadays you can speak any language, even Swahili, and they
 will understand you and respond-just as long as you buy something.
 Going into stores in Estonia has become almost as disgusting as going
 into stores in the West. You go in because there is nothing else to
 do, just to look, and in both places some salesman immediately asks:
 "Can I help you?"
 4.  True, the produce situation is not very good-still not up to the
 level it was under the communists. Soon it will probably get even
 worse, because the Russian government intends to impose economic
 sanctions on Estonia which "will not affect the interests of
 ordinary Estonian citizens." As an example of those sanctions
 Russian government press secretary Gennadiy Shipitko mentioned
 Russian refusal to accept Estonian agricultural products. Nov the
 Estonian people's age-old dream will finally come true-they will no
 longer have to feed their neighbor to the east.
 UNCLASSIFIED        Approv d for Release
 1) To [0
 C00174743
 Page: 20    of 28
 Concatenated JPRS Reports, 1992
 Document 13 of 20                                                Page   2
 5.      The Russian side is behaving in an interesting manner all around.
 First it sets a deadline for verification of respect for the rights
 of ethnic minorities in Estonia-the elections slated for 20
 September. Then, on 7 September, it concludes a free trade agreement
 with Estonia-perhaps forgetting its previous intention? For two years
 prior to this time it has been signing a massive number of agreements
 with Estonia and joyously agreeing with the Estonian side's
 reasoning, i.e that all those who are dissatisfied with the new
 Estonian democracy are not Russians, they are Soviets. The comrades
 do not understand. Then suddenly Russia remembers that it has
 forgotten its ethnic offspring scattered around the national
 periphery, takes a diametrically opposed stance and begins actively
 defending its ethnic kinsmen. Too late, brothers: thanks to efforts
 by the Estonian side European public opinion is already formed. And
 the world, despite Russia's desperate gestures, readily agrees: no,
 the "guest workers" should not be given the right to vote. It was
 recently reported that Europe has decided to fight illegal
 immigration, and lo and behold- Estonia is already going around
 acting as if it were quietly engaged in repatriation of its illegal
 immigrants, i.e. everyone who arrived in the republic after 1940. It
 would be interesting-if it does in fact do that-to find out if
 Yeltsin recalls how in January 1991 during a visit to Tallinn he
 refused to meet with the local Russian population. Or how he printed
 handbills in Estonia at a time when he was forbidden to do so in
 Russia. Did Estonian minister of foreign affairs Jaan Manitski kindly
 remind the world community of that at a recent session of the U.N.
 General Assembly?
 6.  The Russian-Estonian "cold war" is becoming international in
 nature. Formerly the two ministries of foreign affairs merely
 "exchanged shots" via diplomatic notes, but now they are operating
 out in the open. All Kozyrev and his team had to do was raise the
 issue of human rights violations before the U.N., and Manitski
 immediately responded with a counter-speech, saying he supposedly
 could not understand why Kozyrev was demanding that voting rights be
 given to citizens of other states. And that the term ""ethnic
 minority" in no way extends to foreign workers and colonists. So
 that is how it is.  According to him, Russia's firm stance "is
 dictated by a desire to preserve its military influence in Estonia at
 all costs. That is the purpose of the international campaign
 demanding Estonian citizenship for citizens of Russia, so that Russia
 will retain the right to act as their patron." To which Kozyrev
 retorted just before flying out of New York: `Our Baltic neighbors
 are resorting to the old Soviet tactic of crying 'you're one, too'
 instead of discussing existing problems."
 7.  Truly amazing metamorphoses. I recall that about three years ago
 C00174743
 Page: 21    of 28
 Concatenated JPRS Reports, 1992
 Document 13 of 20                                                Page   3
 the most derogatory word in Estonia was "Kremlin," the situation
 was depicted like this: in Russia there were a handful of sinister
 forces and a sea of healthy ones (i.e. the ones that supported
 Estonia), and they were fighting among themselves, and the healthy
 ones would prevail. Nov it is the same picture, except that the
 formerly healthy forces have somehow become sinister. But now new,
 abstract healthy forces are on Estonia's side, and they are about to
 begin correcting an historical injustice. That is, they are going to
 immediately withdraw the occupation troops, recognize the Tartu Peace
 Treaty (and along with it the border which includes the ancient
 Estonian cities of Izborsk, Pechory and Ivan-gorod) and facilitate
 the voluntary return of Russia's citizens to their homeland.
 8.  The official lists of election victors were finally published a
 few days ago. Incidentally, they can only be termed "victors" very
 provisionally, since only 17 candidates out of 101 garnered enough
 votes to be elected.  The rest got into parliament with the help of
 the "redirected" votes of their fellow party members, because
 Estonian election law is oriented toward team play. As a result there
 are people in parliament who got only 50-60 votes, while some
 candidates who got 3,000 votes or more did not make it. Under this
 system none of the independent candidates could get elected. One
 pleasant surprise was the victory of the royalist party, which unites
 many of Estonia's best-known humorists under its banner.
 9.  It will be pleasant to visit the Estonian State Assembly, because
 our newspaper has many acquaintances there: writer Jaan Kross, poet
 Jaan Kaplinski and UFO enthusiast Tunne Kelam. Pianist Vardo Rumessen
 was the one who this past winter, when there was nothing at all to
 eat in the republic, appealed for an end to the sale of Russian
 bread. Marg Nutt is head of the Estonian delegation to the Conference
 on Security and Cooperation in Europe.  He is the one who has
 attempted to prove to the world that Russians here are the same as
 Turks living in Germany. Kalle Kulbok, the royalist leader, is an
 inspector with the Official Language Department. Back in the spring
 he demonstratively ripped down a sign reading "Bistro" from a Swiss
 cafe and fervently demanded that the owners write the word
 Estonian-style, i.e. with a double "o.11 Pastor Hallaste is the
 author of the idea of making foreigners in both East and Vest equal.
 Remember how in early June the Estonian Republic attempted to demand
 $30 from each CIS citizen for an entry visa just as it does from
 Americans? And, finally, there is Jaanus Raidal, the youthful mayor
 of the city of Otepaa, who is preparing to destroy Russia, China and
 Great Britain, build an air bridge between Groznyy and Tartu, and
 reorient Otepaa's industry toward weapons production.
 10.  Today Jaanus Raidal, as a full-fledged member of the Estonian
 parliament, is declaring political war on Russia. Since some Russian
 C00174743
 Page: 22    of 28
 Concatenated JPRS Reports, 1992
 Document 13 of 20                                                Page   4
 politicians have mentioned the fact that they do not recognize the
 new Estonian parliament because one-third of the republic's
 population did not participate in the election, Raidal has mentioned
 in reply that he does not recognize the Russian parliament, either.
 His logic is that since it was elected while the Soviet Union still
 existed, the present membership of parliament does not reflect
 reality, specifically the confederative structure of Russia, the fact
 of Chechnya's and Tatarstan's independence and small peoples'
 striving for autonomy. Jaanus, as a figure of some importance in
 politics, is declaring that he does not recognize a parliament that
 is out of touch with the people, that the Estonian delegation will
 not go to Moscow for negotiations any more because St. Petersburg is
 Russia' capital, and that henceforth Estonia will reach agreements
 with each oblast capital and each people individually and will only
 deign to direct its attention to Moscow and the Russian parliament
 after new elections have been held.
 11.  In view of the highly eccentric composition of the new Estonian
 representative organ, and knowing Jaanus as I do, I can be certain
 that he really will do everything he says.
 13.  The first session of the Estonian State Assembly and the second
 round of presidential elections have now been held.  Lennart Meri,
 leader of the radicals, Estonia's ambassador to Finland and formerly
 minister of foreign affairs, has been elected President of the
 Estonian Republic.

