 000174669
 Page: 8     of I4
 FBIS Concatenated Daily Reports, 1993
 Document 10 of 13
 Page   1
 Classification:   UNCLASSIFIED       Status:       ]STAY]
 Document Date:    16 Oct 93          Category:     [CAT]
 Report Type:      Daily report       Report Date:
 Report Number:    FBIS-SOV-93-201    UDC Number:
 Headline:  Sakhalin Oblast Soviet Holds Last Session
 Source Lines  OW2010005593 Vladivostok Radiostantsiya Tikhiy Okean
 Maritime Network in Russian 0815 GMT 16 Oct 93
 Subslug:  [Ivan Vorobyev report; from the  "Pacific Ocean "  Program]
 FULL TEST OF ARTICLB:
 1.  [Ivan Vorobyev report; from the  "Pacific Ocean "  Program]
 2.  [Text] An oblast soviet of people's deputies session was held in
 Yuzhno-Sakhalinsk today. Our correspondent Ivan Vorobyev discusses
 this.
 3.  [Begin Vorobyev recording] The number 13 became a fateful one for
 soviet power on Sakhalin Island.  The 13th session of the oblast
 soviet of the people's deputies became its last.  A deputy who is a
 UFO expert lamented that the session should not have been scheduled
 for 15 October.  I am not very proficient in astrology, so I will
 convey his explanation in a-simpler way:-The~a~s-just--did--nat--shine-------------------------~
 for the deputies. This might be why only 58 out of 160 deputies
 arrived yesterday for the extraordinary session proposed by Yevgeniy
 Krasnoyarov, the administration head.  Only 46 deputies came for
 today's session, not enough for a quorum.  They had started coming
 from the oblast periphery some time ago, and it seemed that they
 intended to preserve soviet power in the oblast, but while in Moscow,
 the deputies took to arms; in Sakhalin, they 3ust took off. Well,
 this is also a kind of argument, a way of voting.
 4.  Closing the session, administration head Yevgeniy Krasnoyarov
 said: These are cruel times but also purifying.  One must understand
 that both you, the deputies, and we too have some degree of
 responsibility for the bloody events in Moscow, and decisions by many
 Russian Federation soviets supporting the Russian Supreme Soviet's
 actions contributed to the events.  The people's army did not support
 the people's deputies.
 5.  Yevgeniy Krasnoyarov thinks that the deputies do not control the
 situation, do not know the conditions or even their people, and
 continue to preach the soviet psychology, to talk without taking
 responsibility for anything.
 6.  Yevgeniy Krasnoyarov addressed former Russian Deputy Sergey
 Approve  for Release
 f
 ~-
 UNCLASSIFIED                                ~ 9
 000174669
 Page: 9     of 14
 UNCLASSIFIED
 FBIS Concatenated Daily Reports, 1993        page   2
 Document 10 of 13
 Mikhaylov, who exploited yesterday's deputies meeting to expound his
 anti-Yeltsin and antigovernment position, presented as a description
 of the events in Moscow.  The administration head called to avoid
 transferring responsibility of the Moscow events to federation
 members.  He said: Do not instigate the people, do not call for
 unsanctioned, unlawful acts. After all, someone had the time to
 report to Moscow that former Deputy Mikhaylov had spoken at the
 session although there was no session as such. The main goal today is
 not to incite PemaleFederationgCouncilheand localdorgans ofepowers
 for the State Du  :
 7.  yevgeniy Krasnoyarov signed a decree today on reforming
 representative power in Sakhalin Oblast.  All activities of the
 oblast and smaller soviets are suspended, and sessions and
 conferences are canceled.  The status [word indistinct] of the
 deputies is maintained.  The oblast administration has taken over all
 functions of representative power.  Smaller soviet members will form
 a commission for [word indistinct] which, to a certain extent, will
 be charged with conducting the elections and working out the oblast
 charter.
 8.  Anatoliy Aksenov, chairman of the former oblast soviet, addressed
 the gathering.  He said: The deputies must do everything possible to
 _guaranxee_the_s.Qnds:cting of _elections_on_12 December and make a sober
 -    -                       --
 --
 judgment of the situation to help create a second-branch o -         y---_-- ---- --_---
 and stabilize the country's situation.  On his behalf and on behalf
 workhwithpuchairmenaofltheAsoviets,hdeputieseofoallhlevelsa andnce to
 administration workers.
 9.  Can it really be true, that we bid farewell to the soviet power
 with. wishes of goodwill?  One would really like to believe that. [end
 recording]

