 rC00015272
 MMMMEMMEOMMUM
 %i.4z ' tixhting of Unusual then meson so
 norison Rear Iranian/USSR larder
 tlwtt C
 e+dO 17 Jun 66
 MCt A
 Owtt ACO
 00- 2-3W1,530-46
 so wit
 1. On 17 Jsa 66, at 2112 hours, local time
 ,
 eneren. Iran. on an insernat1coal flight, I observed a strange
 pheno .nos on the horizon.  As we were approaching the liudeshur beacon,
 located ?ppraeir.Ately 2S miles VS1 of Melrabad Airport. !.bens. we snd-
 denly observed a brilliant white sphere apprwlmating the eolwatios 4n4
 intensity of full bright eeoom.  The, sphere appeared suddenly and at the
 inrst sighting woe approMlostuly three times the site of a full moon.
 At the noeent, we were flying at appeeaieet.ly 11.000 toot an s course
 of 070 daAre.s at a speed of about 200 knees.  The sighting occurred Just
 as we prepared to fly a eireuldr pattern over the Rudeshunr b.seoo prior
 to descending to a lever altitude and heading, for M.Irabad Airport.  we
 onsarv.d the sightin;, throughout the time we circled the hud..hur beaten,
 a time we later calculated to be of fear to five ainutsa duration.  I
 would s.timsto the position if the sphere to be we a heading et 010
 derraes and deep within the Swiss Union, perhaps sortb of 60 degrees
 latitude.  During the four to five .louts that I observed the sphere. It
 continued to grow in also as its intensity diminished.  Towed the and of
 this parrot it became very faint and its ensrmws aloe sowed to fill the
 say.  The bass of the spbsrs, appeared to rest on the kor1YOU Throughout
 the period it in. observed, indicating that the Center of the sphere use
 rising during the time that it Now ampandiag.  The "other eeaditton.
 were excellent and the unusually clear sky afforded unlimited vlaihility.
 2.  Another airliner at a slightly loin altitude also oboes wed the phenomenon
 and we exchanged remarks about it. Oa landing at NalmsMad Airport soma
 20 .mutes later, we discovered that the phenomenon was not seen two the
 ground except possibly during th..very Let .toga.  At that point, sins.
 two intensity had so markedly diminished, it would go unnoticed roles.
 ?:?:::.-c) Lim 1uiLLnL
 e,e
 C00015272   .,.
 unless on. were alerted is xeok for It. "0. Ousel fop its deafly
 ebamrrd frog the treats is .R}e.1l..tod to tM *  pt miss of go soy
 hick mountain raata aartbLOf tM tlty 1.::w../fsetks.[ th. p u..ra~w.
 3. : aoa't kaov what eaea+d thL..trsnp taasreawatiie- r? 0 sw .4.
 ?Ad never **to aaytbhw rsasrbliat It lu ever t0 Y400 of flyi g usposi-
 oo.  One theory advanced to so we that the ahpu e?0 a'7Isa aswe
 s   that each a pheasasuea we omw% seas Rags, Italy.  Ny fsalW 1s'tht
 the sphere was fcee.d by safes .aaastias P~ fraa a s.a.eMI i.&.lar.
 These Lasea foralat the O hUI may ha a Mau iilmlwtod by tbr'wra taw
 the back side.  It We vers tae seas, it waeid assaaat fir the disiial0b-
 Lnf iatesaicy as the deesity of the taw demiw0d with Us wgiesslas sf
 the spbwe.

