 000015470
 OIITRISUTION
 V
 COUNTRY
 SUBJECT
 HOW
 PUBLISHED
 WHERE
 PUBLISHED
 DATE
 PUBLISHED
 LANGUAG:
 a4                   -1       . C-.r .. A......
 French West Africa; Algeria; Corsica; Franz*;
 West Germany
 Military - Unconventional aircraft
 3 Jul ? 20 NOT 1952
 REPORT NO.OO.v-25291
 CO NO.
 DATE OF
 DATE DIST.9 Feb 1953
 NO. OF PAGES 3
 SUPPLEMENT TO
 REPORT NO.
 THIS IS UNEVALUATED INFORMATION
 ETRANGE OBJECT SIOR D OVER DAKAR - Dakar, Paris.Dakar, 3 Jul 52
 On the corning of 3 July 1952, precisely at 0608 hours, the technical manager
 of the broadcasting station at Re= Center observed an unusual object fol ,wing
 a strange path above Dakar.  The object was clearly visible for about 5 seconds
 against a clear and no longer starry sky.
 The witness was on Route de Front de Terre, when, looking south toward Dakar
 and above the Centre de Reception (Reception Center), be spotted a flat but ta-
 pered object emitting, rather long, reddish  tresks of light with a bluish tinge.
 The fiery object was moving at '+a dizzy speed," which be estimated'to be "two
 or three times greater than that of the fastest planes.   It moved from vast to
 east and disappeared with a swoop upwards, according to the witness, who believes
 that the object was about 1,500 meters high when be first noticed it, tbc.gh be
 admits that it was difficult to judge its approximate altitude.
 Ahe following editorial comment by Paris Dakar followed the above report-7
 The staff reporter of Parts-Dakar is of the opinion that'the object in fiu="s
 tion was a meteor and that it   sapp`eared in a downward, not upward, trajector,-,
 UNUSUAL OBJECT SEEN 0V   DRAW -- Dakar, Paris-i,akar, 4 Jul 52
 On 3 July 1952, at 1900 hours, a mechanic on his way borne to a suburb of
 OF", Algeria, -noticed in the direction of the Seale airport a silvery disk which
 vat maneuvering slowly and apparently revolved rapidly.  After 3 minutes, the ob-
 ject disappeared toward the sea, west of Oran. The witness reported that the ob-
 ject was small aad that it was not shaped like a balloon or plane. -At the local
 weather station, 'it was stated that no balloons bad been released at the time.
 EN
 C00015470
 J
 ALGERIAN WEATHER BUREAU CHIEF DISCOUNTS SAUMM REPORTS -- Dakar, )sris-Dakar,
 7 Avg 52
 The director of the Algerian weather bvreav stated recently that the "fly-
 ing saucers" seen recently over Algiers were only weather balloons which are sent
 up each evening between 2000 and 2030 hours from the weather stations at Matson
 Blanche, Blida, and Boufsrik.  Be said that in their underbel7.ies, the balloons
 carry a luminous' device which, together with the motion of the balloons as they
 are buffeted by the wind, must have side the sees like "flying saveera" to the
 spectators.
 LUMINOUS OBJECT SIOBRED OVER CORSICO? Al`iers,L'Eeho d'Alger, k Oct 52
 On 2 October 1952, at about MOO boars, several people in Cornea observed
 a spindle-shaped, lasainow object traveling noiselessly in the sky. They said
 that it was headed from southwest to northeast and was visible for about one sin-
 ate.
 DESCRIBE UNUSUAL OBJECT PLTING ALONG ALGERIAN COASTLINE -- Algiers, L'Eeho
 d'Alger, 7 Oct 52
 On 6 October 1952, at 1830 hours, a luminous object was seen flying for sev-
 eral seconds along the western coastline of Algeria, above Sidi Ferruch and Saint
 Eugene.  Nuaeroos witnesses described it as cigar-shaped and enveloped in orange
 flares.
 NARY WITLESS "FLYING SAUCER" YC MAT705 IN TARN, PRANCE -- Casablanca, Naroc=
 Presse, 29 Oct 52
 About 100 inbabi0u*v of Gaillae (Department of Term, Prance) reported wit-
 sensing a "flying saucer" formation kst about 1600 bows on 27 October 1952. The
 objects were said to x&z.,c been 16 in number, ranged in twos, and disk-shaped, ex-
 cept for a welling in the center. According to the report, they revolved giv-
 ing off a bluish light at the sides.
 The spectators said that they also saw a kind of elongated cylinder, a,,fly-
 ing etgar," traveling in the center of the saucer formation.  All the objects
 were said to have discharged shining whitish particles, which looked like glass
 wool and accumulated on tree branches and telegraph wires.  !Many persons said that
 they bad been able to gather clusters of such particles, but that these had
 quickly disintegrated, mating it impossible to have then analyzed later in a lab-
 oratory.
 The weather conditions were reported as ideal for observation.  The mysteri-
 ous objects, which bad came from the southeast, reportedly remained in the area
 about 10 minutes and then continued on their way in a straight line.
 INVENTOR IN      ;,ERMANY            "?L  !G SAUCER" > Conakry, La Cuinee Prancaise,
 20 Nov 52            %
 The first patent for a "flying saucer" was recently applied for in West Ger-
 many by Rudolf Schriever, a former pilot, who claimed to have perfected an "ellip-
 tical flying object" after 11 years of research.
 . 1tF
 ~C111~`~? ?.  "1
 TLL cur -~'T~
 C00015470
 The Inventor Clsised that the Craft, equipped Math motors, has a disaster of
 40 meters ant can rune and deece%d vertically or remain slotionless in the air.
 Is estimated its uxiaua speed an 4,000 kilometers per bow.

