 C00015398
 Case - Photographs  IF ahA Baokgrouad on    dentifled Flying.
 Object Been bRalph :.. Mayrher.
 photographs             NEWFQ--Tu inn amident  1          Object.
 The photographs env forxarded herewith and any be retained for
 days,
 2.   On print marked "A" is an enlarged photograph.
 of the rftinal 16 an scoria stsip on which W. Kayber took the
 photo. in 1952    The elm of the U70 any be gauged in relation
 to the perforations on the file which are of known standard size.
 The large print marked "$" is an outsized enlargement made from
 a stepped up negative of one of the original frames.
 3.   It any be of interest to )mov bow the enclosed
 prints were processed.  Pictures were originally snapped on 16 ma
 movie film from which a mn* er or hints were easde.  roan by 5
 negatives were processed from these prints, then 8 by 10 negatives
 were processed from the latter.   The three 8 by 10 printe are con-
 tact prints of the 8 by 10 negatives.  The large print, "B, is a
 blow-up of one of the 8 by 10 negatives.
 4.   Background information follova:
 5.   Camera used was a 16 an movie, focal 2esagth of
 lens was 63 mz, speed 24 trams per second.  Altitude of the WO,
 as estimated by .b  as and other observers, was two thousand feet.
 Maximum camera angle was estimated by source to be e50.  The UFO
 appeared to have the shape of a saucer, i.e., a rotating oblate
 spheroid which seemed to flatten out as speed increased. The WV
 was in view for about three aiaoutea cad was of a bright orange
 color.  At the time the film was talon the lens aperture of the
 camera was f:2.7.   Fits emulsion was fast panchromatie.' Time
 elapsed between photographing the first image and the sixth image
 (the first being the sandiest at the top of the film strip) was
 approzimatev .25 see.
 6.               indicated that he would be glad to mks
 such negatives as      a available on a two weeks loan A'.:t4V.xauld
 hands:
 .  In accordance with tole  me request made by
 on b Nov 57 we obtained fro.

