 C00015435
 A4
 23 February 1967
 SUBJECT:  Visit of Dr  Condon-to NPIC, 20 February 1967--
 1.  The U.S. Air Force has let a $300,000 contract to the  -
 University of Colorado to study reported UFO sightings.  Brig.
 Gen. Edward B. Gillers;-USAF,- is senior Air Force contact and
 Dr. Thomas Rachford-is-senior.Air..Force:Scientist on the project.
 The senior scientist-from_the.University of Colorado is
 Dr. E.U. Condon.
 2.  On 20 February,.. 1967 at.0915 Dr. Condon and four members
 of his investigative team visited NPIC.  With Dr. Condon were
 Dr. Richard-towe  lniversity-of_Colorado, Dr. David Sauunders, __ - _ -
 University*of Colorado, De. William Price,; Executive Director
 bf AFRST, and Dr" Rachf6t d  USAF.- The-purDose of this visit was
 to familiarize Dr. Condon and members of his team with selected
 photogracunetric and-pha~tographic_ anal_y_sis_ capabilities of NPIC
 3.  The clearance --level.for_:the meeting was SECRET.
 4.  Upon-arrival-at NPIC, 091.5,                escorted the
 group to Dtr. Lundahl's office.  In the ensuing 10-15 minute
 discussion between Mr. Lundahl and Pr.-Condon the following points
 were clearly established:
 a.  Any work performed by NPIC to assist Dr. Condon
 in his investigation will not-be-identified as work accom-
 plished by CIA.  Dr. Condon was advised by Mr. Lundahl to
 make no_reference to-CIA-in-regard to this work effort.
 Dr. Condon stated that.if he felt it necessary to obtain
 an official CIA-Wmn%-ft -h4-.VMld  ke_a separate distinct
 entry into CIA not related to-contacts he has with NPIC..
 b.  NPIC will not prepare any written comments, will
 not analyze information with the intent of drawing a
 conclusion, nor prepare written reports.  NPIC personnel
 Approved for Release
 C00015435
 SUBJECT:  Visit of Dr. Condon to NPIC, 20 February 1967
 will be available to assist Dr. Condon by performing work
 of a photogramsetric..nature,_suchas-attemptong to measure
 objects imaged on photographs that may be part of
 Dr. Condon's analysis.  Work performed by NPIC will be
 strictly of a technical nature-using services and equipment
 generally not available elsewhere.
 5s  Following this brief-discussion in Mr. Lundahl's office
 the group adjourned to the     conference room where a series of
 briefings was presented to-Dr.-Condon-and his group.  Following a
 short introduction by               the following briefings were
 presented:
 a.  General discussion_of_photogrammetry, including.__
 definition, _terminology and,--its-gneral, what photogrenmetry
 is .and what--ix                           presented _this.--
 discussion.
 b.                                             followed
 with a-presentation of the analysis-be had been conducting on
 UFO photography furnished NPIC by Dr. Rachford.
 discussion was of a general.-riature'and outlined the problems
 he had encountered because.of.lack of basic- inforration, -
 such as camera focal length, make of camera,.urspecified
 enlargements, etc.    -
 c.                         then gave a general-discussion---
 on tht-microdensitometer and.its_applicationto.image..analysis.
 d.                            followed-this. with a
 presentation on isodensitomete,r,experiments he has been
 conducting.
 e*                   then escorted the group into the
 new clean area-where--they viewed and discussed the isoden.
 sitometer and the new Mann Microdensitometer.
 f.  Returning to the conference room,
 briefed the group on measuring instruments used in     and
 followed by a general presentation on the success and
 failure     had experienced in trying to measure objects
 imaged on the second UFO project assigned       Following
 "10r: Ai--lssion                  then conducted the group into
 the instrument area where the Point ^ransf er Device, Mann
 880 Comparator, the Benson-Lehner Plotter and the NitI were
 viewed-by--the- group.-:-        __-  --
 SUPJECT:  Visit of Dir. Condon to NPIC, 20 February 1XG7
 6.  At about 1215             escorted the group back to
 Mr. Lundahl's office where a general discussion on UFOs ensued.
 At about, 1235 the group adjourned to lunch and following lunch
 they left NPIC for a meting with.Br.ig.Gen_Gillers at the
 pentagon.
 7.  Most all the discussion during the morning was of an
 unclassified nature dealing with primary basic fundamentals of
 photogrammetry, photographic analysis and problems related to
 the acquiring of enough information.to conduct meaningful-analyses.

