 000174677
 Page: 1     of 5
 Concatenated JPRS Reports, 1992
 Document 4 of 20                                              Page   1
 Classification:    UNCLASSIFIED      Status:        [STAY]
 Document Date:     16 Jun 92         Category:      [CAT]
 Report Type:       JPRS report       Report Date:
 Report Number:     JPRS-UEQ-92-009   UDC Number:
 Author(s):  Vladimir Lagovskiy under the  "Sensation "  rubric:
 "Plight to Alpha Centauri"  ; boldface as per source
 text]
 Headline:  Flight to Alpha Centauri
 Source Line:  927F0229A Moscow RABOCHAYA TRIBUNA in Russian 16 Jun 92
 pp 1, 3
 Subslug:  [Article by Vladimir Lagovskiy under the  "Sensation "
 rubric:  "Flight to Alpha Centauri " ; boldface as per
 source text]
 RILL TEST OF ARTICLE:
 1.  [Article by Vladimir Lagovskiy under the  "Sensation "  rubric:
 "Flight to Alpha Centauri " ; boldface as per source text]
 2.  (Text] Specialists at the Experimental Machine Building
 Scientific Research Association have created a high-temperature
 superconductor that loses its electrical resistance at_80 degrees___
 Celsius. It breaks the old confirmed world's record by nearly 100
 degrees Celsius. Moreover, there is proof that this is not the limit:
 Superconductors may be created at 850 degree Celsius. And it may be
 used as the basis for constructing a fundamentally new type of
 spacecraft capable of reaching light speed.
 3.  On a Flying Saucer
 4.  From the outset, we acknowledge this as fact. The rumors that the
 military-industrial complex, which is precisely the owner of the
 Experimental Machine Building Scientific Research Association, is in
 all seriousness interested in  "flying saucers "  and considers them
 ~to be real. I have the document in front of me. It is called
 "Protocol for a Future Method of Aircraft Travel. "  On top is the
 customary  "Approved by "  signature stamp followed by the signature
 of the deputy commander of the military unit and his official stamp.
 Next comes the date and site of the test and the test object. And
 then there is the objective, at which point it is written that the
 experiments were conducted to assess the effect of the movement of a
 bulk high-temperature superconductor subjected to the effect of a
 flux of fast-moving electrons in accordance with the aircraft
 research program developed at the Experimental Machine Building
 Scientific Research Association and the N-th military unit.
 UNCLASSIFIED          Approved for Release
 000174677
 Page: 2     of 5
 Concatenated .TPRS Reports, 1992
 Document 4 of 20                                              Page   2
 5.  It is no accident that I am presenting these data in such detail.
 Our stereotypes are strong. Indeed, many will say that  "saucers "
 means  "newcomers. "  And newcomers are gibberish. No, this matter is
 uncommonly serious. This is no discussion of fantastic hypotheses but
 of the current rift between technology and fundamental knowledge.
 The  "Protocol "  is not the only such affirmation. There are also
 patents, inventor's certificates, and applications for discoveries
 and inventions.
 6.   "jihat we are proposing,"  says Vasiliy Shabetnik, senior
 scientific associate of the Experimental Machine Building Scientific
 Research Association and candidate of technical sciences,  " is a
 fundamentally new method of space travel. And we can demonstrate
 it."
 7.  Here is the so-called Mohammed's grave-a saucerlike body made of
 a cooled superconductor sailing freely in a magnetic field. Nearly
 all developers of high-temperature superconducting compounds have
 "toyed around with "  this focal point. And it has excited its
 enthusiasts' imagination.  It seems that this is 3ust-how one can fly
 over the earth in some sort of miracle craft. It is possible. There
 are no theoretical obstacles. But here is the problem: On closer
 examination, this generally sensible idea turned out to be fraught
 with irresolvable technical problems.
 8.  To rise above our planet in the geomagnetic field, for example, a
 "saucer "  would have to create its own incredibly strong magnetic
 field. And this is far from easy, even with the superconductors
 themselves. But suppose a way could be found? How would it move in
 space, which is chock-full of magnetic fields?
 9.   "The ship would need to be equipped with additional sustainer
 engines,"  the enthusiasts shouted back. That was, of course, the way
 out. Only would the game be worth the candle?
 10.  In a word, for reasons that are entirely understandable, many
 specialists consider such methods of travel more hypothetical than
 realistic. And so a solution was found.  It was a simple one, as it
 should have been.
 11.  An experimental unit. A flux of fast--moving electronics would
 fly from an accelerator and be carried along with a model made of a
 superconductor. And  "Mohammed's grave "  instantaneously dumped to
 the side in the-flash of an eye.
 12.   "Now imagine a real spacecraft, "  says Shabetnik.  "Its body is
 will be covered with a high-temperature superconductor.  Fast-moving
 .,..., ..
 000174677
 Page: 3    of 5
 Concatenated JPRS Reports, 1992
 Docusent 4 of 20                                          page   3
 electron emitters will be mounted in a circle. The charged particles
 will bathe the ship. As they move, they will create a current and an
 electromagnetic field. And a field and current will simultaneously
 arise in the superconducting layer. What will happen? The fields and
 currents will begin to interact with ampere force. Simply speaking,
 their carriers will repel one another. And this is incomparably more
 efficient than the interaction of the simple electromagnetic field of
 a craft and the earth's geomagnetic field. The ship will soar and
 appear to sail in the very electron medium that it formed around
 itself."
 13.  The sphere is the ideal shape for interstellar travel.
 "Saucers "  are best for travel in the atmosphere. It is therefore
 obviously necessary to create a craft with a changing geometry. Its
 start from the surface will require only an extremely modest
 electrical force. About 100 amperes will suffice for a 5-ton
 spaceship. It will be easy to maneuver by increasing or decreasing
 the currents along its sides.
 14.  From a Superconductor
 15.  Scientists are essentially proposing an electromagnetic method
 of travel. But it has been fundamentally modernized. The idea itself
 is not subject to doubt. But will it be possible from an engineering
 standpoint? Superconductors are needed. The record, i.e., minus 80
 __  ----
 egraes Ce s us wou2c~be fine -for space--There tie-temperatures are
 such lower. But this threshold is not enough for the atmosphere.
 16.   "But have you forgotten,"  wonders Vasiliy Dmitriyevich,  "that
 we have proposed superconductors that maintain zero resistance at 850
 degrees Celsius? "
 17.   " I have not forgotten. But all that is still just plans. "
 18.   "Yes, they are just plans, but they are entirely realistic."
 19.   Shabetnik and his colleagues are certain that they have
 discovered new fundamental laws governing the structure of matter.
 This knowledge makes it possible to explain the properties of matter
 in a way never attempted before-on the basis of probability and
 statistics. A more natural approach has been proposed.
 20.  Researchers have demonstrated, for example, that the physical
 parameters of all elements depend on the number and state of their
 elementary particles. It has even been possible to establish the
 shape and structure of these building blocks. And it has turned out
 that everything in the material world around us is subject to exact
 calculation.  Everything from boiling point and entropy to
 000174677
 Page: 4     of 5
 Concatenated JPRS Reports, 1992
 Document 4 of 20                                             Page   4
 superconductivity is a phenomenon that may be discovered but could
 not be explained from the, standpoint of previous principles. And
 where there is exact calculation, substances with prespecified
 properties may be designed.  That is how scientists initially
 theoretically predicted the existence of a superconductor at minus 80
 degrees Celsius.  And then they produced it. And the result confirmed
 the theory exactly. And now a plan for 850 degrees has appeared. And
 there is no basis for suggesting that it will not be successful.
 21.   " I will not stop until all secrets have been revealed,"  says
 Shabetnik,  "but I give a hint that ordinary iron may become the
 basis of the new superconductor. The intricacy will be the energy
 order of arrangement of the rest of the elements. "
 22.   "Okay. But what fuel do you intend to use in space? "  I
 suddenly remembered.
 23.  And Almost With a Perpetual Motor
 24.   "Will you place a nuclear reactor or a thermonuclear reactor on
 the ship? Or perhaps you will return to the energy of a vacuum? "
 25.   "Neither of the three,"  answers Vasiliy Dmitriyevich.   "Do
 you recall yet another sensation that burst forth about the same time
 as high-temperature superconductivity? I mean, when the discover of
 _what is called-the"'Tcold-tfiermal"-nucreus`~was announced In the
 United States. This effect was later reproduced in many laboratories.
 It was reproduced but again left unexplained. And why? Because they
 tried to find signs of thermonuclear reactions where none exist. "
 26.   " I remember those experiments well. I even observed one at
 Moscow State University: a tank with heavy water, two live
 electrodes, and no idea where the additional heat was coming from.
 But if its source was not a "cold thermal nucleus, "  what then was
 27.   " We call the phenomenon `energy conversion.' And that very tank
 is a primitive model of a converter. The water in it boils. To put it
 in scientific terms, a phase transition takes place. The particles in
 the water move in an ordered fashion on account of the electric
 field.  According to our theory, in such cases phase transitions
 yield an increased amount of thermal energy. The gain is a factor of
 2.12 to 4.2 higher than the work expended."
 28.   "Wait, wait,"  I said while trying to digest what I was
 hearing.  "Does this mean that a perpetual motor has been produced? "
 29.   " No. The internal energy of the matter has?been extracted."
 000174677
 Page: 5     of 5
 Coacatenated JPRS Reports, 1992
 Document 4 of 20                                              Page   5
 30.   "And can it be used in some way?"
 31.   " If you please. You could even build power plants instead of
 conventional ones. But I repeat, it will all be unbelievably
 primitive-water, boiling....And of course, such a converter would not
 be fit for space flights. "
 32.   " We have found an electric analogue of processes involving
 energy conversion, "  continues Shabetnik.   "And energy can be
 extracted not just from water but, let's say, from metal as well. It
 is conceivable that you could connect our converter to an electric
 generator. And the output would be fourfold the energy that it could
 provide while operating conventionally. A fourth could be diverted to
 feed the generator, and you would have the rest as a gift from your
 microworld.
 33.   "But in reality everything is of course more complicated.  In
 essence, an energy converter consists of several devices working in
 conjunction with one another. The main components are a closed
 superconductor and control system. They are for ground needs. The
 electron accelerator that is connected to the circuit transforms the
 converter into a spacecraft engine. With its help, a spacecraft can
 fly to Alpha Centauri and back to earth in 12 years. "
 34.  - ``Has- it been p~sstt~ie to recreate--these processes~~f-only ~ri
 experiments? "
 35.   "Yes. Otherwise I would never have told you anything.
 According to our calculations, the energy hidden in a kilogram of
 iron is completely sufficient for interstellar travel. "
 36.  As far as the future is concerned, let us say straight out that
 it is fantastic. Even without flights to other worlds.  Indeed energy
 converters will be used to meet needs on earth. The time has already
 come to dream not only of miraculous generators capable of replacing
 nightmarish nuclear and thermal power plants or of new means of
 travel. Our entire lives will be turned around.

