 C00015421
 )Ir Z. ca13
 Deps*y Assistant Director for CcUisltaa/CIX
 Reply to your Rote Rapnrdie g Oosdon 1. 8ebsrW
 /3.3
 AL Auueaet 3.960
 1.  He have investigated this with th~ Air Fzae and laudtkat
 Ws. Goldsn teleg;aptsd.tba Secretary c    to along the tem. Lime.
 'She bas men carrying en comespantlnae with the Air Yam for quite
 some tine on the aensr4 subject of UPV'a. (Attached is their
 rally to. Mrs. Golden.) ,b. State Dspartarat ref s x ed the telegrs
 to the Air Force who, In, On
 answered Mss. Golden to the anent
 that the U.S. Naval Attac a enlvation indicatal that thi pica
 was false. She photo was taken by a Zr.. lance pbototp'apbar noted
 for bis trick.photcSrapW.  It vas not, as the. Golden states,
 devalo ed In the presence ck'anyone.
 3.  X think at  :fsval attacbe's final cs;'ent an Its vhot,e affair
 asses 3..t up VV-27 veil: 'It is the reparttng officer's private opinica
 icTlicate CIA.
 2 do not believe ve
 is 4s. GaMn-%lett,er that do not. cancers CIA;, thesetoro, we have
 a      only than gvkstiani. The Air Tom is respo  ible and is
 doing a very cood job of ptshlia latoreeoticn in W & field and' it bat
 been our V =t crocedurs'_ to refer all. Matters to than vbes it does not
 that a flyi g savaer sighting vaeeld be tasliloely at the very barren
 islln3 o frmndxde, as everyone knave }!artians we exhmomly. contort
 gloving creatures."
 Attached is a draft reply for Cat easeese Soberer per your
 request.                                   -
 P                                                                                               ./
 Ron. Gordon Soberer
 Rouse Office Building
 Washington 25, D.C.
 I
 0
 P
 Y
 Anwist 1, 3960
 Several webs ago a picture of a UFO was shown on the Dave Garroeesy show.
 It %.*s the famous Brazilian UFO.  It, was taken an babr'd the Brazilian
 Navy ICY ship in daylight and in full. view of about a hundred persons.
 It was developed aboard in the presence. %X the officers of the ship.
 It was certified as being authenitia 'by .be Navy, released to the press
 by the 8razilien President hiaself.  't 'van in that headlines of all the
 Brazilian newspapers for a week. It crested such tremendous public
 interest that a congressional, investtdatica followed, said as a result
 much more uFO information was made public.
 The Brazilians know about their UFOs. I have copies of themagaaitu
 o TPd1?  RO in which maav z"tsteading incidents are frankly and openly
 discussed.  I recent4y :-ecai;-red a seven pegs report on censorship in
 Brazil from Dr. Marc yazfizs, Brazil'st best known UFO researcher.
 What censorship there is in Brazil is largely at our insistence and the
 authorities don't Like even that much.  There have.. been an average of
 six to eight sightings/month for fifty months, and sometimes there are
 as many as thirty in a two hour period. Nov are these well informed
 people going to react to hearing their President and several" Navy
 officials called frauds? .
 Or course I as concerned about the affect of this an our campaign to
 get the UFO situation opened up in this country. But.I an oven more
 You may -act agree with this at present, Mr. Soberer, but the American
 Air Force is withholding evidence even from Ccspesanen, and I feel strongly
 that the time has long since cons when this dangerous situation should be
 cleared up.  ATIC has now admitted hiding the Project Grudge report by
 marking it "secret", and admitted that the CIA is involved in the UFO
 investigation.  On the other hand it has denied many serious incidents
 it had previously confirmed.  Why, why does there have to be secrecy at
 all?  r:st is the CIA covering so desperately that it is necessary to
 make such incredible charges against the head of a friendly government?
 I have a good understaa..ng o: 3cienti:ic method, and I am n:t   craft.-t.
 The Air Force "explanations" many times simply do not explain, and their
 statistics are obviously contrived.  The feeling about UFOs has changed
 in Cincinnati.  There hasn't been a tongue-in-cheek article published for
 over a year.  As General O'Keefe said last December, and Senator Johnson
 has said recently, UFOs are serious business.
 Won't you, Sir, lend your help by making a stand for open Congressional
 hearings? And if you feel you can't do that, at least do something stout
 the Brazilian affair.  Thank you.
 331i 7h all St, Apt 3               Sincerely
 Cincinnati 20, Ohio                 Catherine Carter Golden

