 C00015481
 COUNTRY    am-Orbit
 SUBJECT    Military - Unidentified flying ob;eets
 NOW
 PUBLISHED  Daily newspapers
 WHERE
 PUBLISHED  As Indicated
 DATE
 PUBLISHED  S Jul-2 Sep 1954
 LANGUAGE   Various                     r i&
 DATE OF
 (NFORMSATION  1954
 DATE D(ST. elf Oct 195+
 ? SIG8MAGS OF uam?l rIFI , PLYIIIG OASr7LTS
 UKIDE RrIFnID PLYTG ?JDLT EIGBl'iD OVEN JIOAWAY -- Oslo, Verdens Gang
 During exercises by an antiaircraft battery at Stavdrn, an unidentified
 flying object appeared to the sky directly in the line of fire am vu observed
 througgn powerful binoculars by 50 off leers ana men.  The object vas located at
 a coosidera0le distance and at an ale of 30-II40 degrees to the horlwatal; it
 was round or slightly elliptseal in shape, flat on the underside, and. silvery
 on the upper side.  It loved up and down slowly for 7 minutes and than moved
 away at a speed estimated at several times the speed of Sound.
 "FL'flk SAUMS" SIOBPSD OVER WEST BEMLDi -- Casablanca, Is Vigie Marocaloe,
 5 Jul 54
 Since PAY 1954, mysterious objects, described as "flying saucers," have
 been observed (daily!) between 2200 and 2300 Fours by various persons living
 A& Aleut SerlLn.
 Several inhabitants, the crew of the local weather station, and a police
 officer on h4dht duty at headquarters observed three "flylnj saucers" over the
 city of Darmstadt.  They appeared at around 2200 hours (presuasby on 6 Aug-nti,
 were of a fiery yellowish-red color, and seemed alternately to stand still sod
 dart back end forth soundlessly.  They were observed for about 1 1/2 boorz,
 1LASIFICATION
 00015481
 Several people elm* report having seen two "flying saucers' over Schleswig
 between 2200 sad 2315 hours.  They were described u .atat, fiery red points of
 light, which finally approached close enough to be made out u disks.  Greenish-
 white rays are reported to We been emanated from the center of the. disks.
 'TLYIR0 SAUCERS' OVUI BC7MIS GERMANY -- low York, 5.1, Btaats-Zeitueg uod
 Rerold, 25 Aug 54
 Two "flying saucers" were seen over the city of Rutatt several, days ago,
 shortly after 2200 hours, by at least 2 dosewritneases.  The saucers passed
 over the city from West to best within a few seconds.  The two disk-like 9b-
 jects vere.lighted like white aeon lamps and side so noise.  The radar sets
 at the nearby airfield of Soellingen, where Royal Canadian Air forts jet
 fighters are based, failed to pick than up, because of their high altitude.
 Tocre have been several cases of sightings of "flying saucers' over Southern
 Germany recently.
 "TlxrH. SAUCERS" OVER SM272MAPD -- 9 .1, Steats-Zei?.   wad berold, 29 Aug 54
 According to the WA (Deutsche Presse Adentur, German Press Agency), a
 number of Swiss, including members of the Swiss Air Toros, have reported 'fly-
 ing saucers" to she author--a durin the past few days.  Five objects, flying
 is fornati.on. were reported over the area between Lake Constance and the
 Saentis mountain range.   (The 19 August 1954 issue of the Casavlancs, newspaper
 La~VS ie haroesine reported that five saucers were observed over Lace Constance
 on 13 August.
 At Chur, a similar pbenomenon was observed On three successive evenings,
 when bright objects were seen ilyirg at an altitude of about 3,000 meters.
 SEES "Fi.YIN  SAUCER" IN CVrLRAL FRAME -- Paris, ..'Aurore, 19 Aug 54
 Clan.:. Cocbe. an industrial designer residing; in the town of Vincennes,
 deelarad that it 'be afternoon et 17 August 1954, he had seen a "flying sau-
 cer" in t'c sSf over Montlucon. Allier Department.  Be described what he saw
 ass iumibou?.  ?i7) i:,ict vhttc, alsk-like object.  The phenomenon was visible
 for  everal'sererws before it was hidden by a cloud.
 REPCFM-FLTIIIP CIGAR" AND "SA'JCi1W" It MW.TUUIN YRAMCE -- Paris, le Tigard,   -
 27 Aug 54
 A 25-year-old man of Vernon, rare Department, reported that during the
 night of 22 August 1954, he had seen, motionless in the sky, a large, luminous,
 cigar-shaped object, from which a flying saucer detached itself, assumed a ver-
 tical position, descended a short die ante, leveled off, and silently disap-
 peared at great speed.  Be stated the: this silent appearance and flight vac
 repeated in turn by four other saucers.  The fifth saucer descended farther
 then the others and was clearly red in the center and black along the edge.
 (By the time the last flight was completed.) the 'cigar' had long since 'vola-
 tilised" laic).  The entire phenomenon lasted about 45 m4mutes.
 Two constables of Verson also reported having seen an elongated, luminous
 flying object during that -tight.
 000015481
 w,lzarxix  t1"M am lsa -- Dakar, lads-Daunt, a asp 5%
 At 2015 taus an 31 August 1954, Dead Tsr4y lo reported to have seen a
 tying objeo'. In the ebape of a short, fat cigar flying from east to vest over
 1yno. tha object Was bbuLb-dames In color and emitted sparks from its tail.
 It disappeared in a tow seconds toward the radio beacon ee Nsust Yerdan.
 mmonU
 z a" 54 1>a- > tlo cu me 0/=R Fm3ex f    IAI. ATAICA -- Lisbon, Marla da
 brassaville, 19 July (A/I) -- Monsignor YsrhlUe, Apostolic Vicar of Tort
 Rousset, reported in the DressaviUe newspaper L     ae M 1'A]Q that he sod
 others had sighted an uaidsntified flying object Over Wall in the Llkuala-
 IbsseM region of the Middle Congo co 18 June 1954 at 1935 hours.  A luminous
 globei it cue trot the North toward the laketi Niseloe.  St suddenly stopped,
 rose and dropped, stopped again, gyrated, and seemed to shake.  A noise line
 that of an airplane engine, beard until that aceeat, also stopped. Seen
 through binoculars, the Heat hod a dark ass in ti.e center vith light rays
 of unequal length analog out of it alternately.  It vent through its rising,
 falling, sod stabilistng eavenaats for 15 minutes, then, shot back over the
 northern horizon. %

