 C00174755
 Page: 10    of 26
 Concatenated JPRS Reports, 1990
 Document 4 of 8                                                 Page   1
 Classification:   UNCLASSIFIED       Status:        [STAT]
 Report Type:      JPRS Report        Report Date:
 Report Number:    JPRS-UIA-90-001    UDC Number:
 Headline:  English Summaries of Major Articles
 Source Line:  90UI0138b Moscow NARODY AZII I AFRIKI in English No 4,
 Jul-Aug 89pp 218-221
 FULL TEXT OF ARTICLE:
 1.  [Text] COUNTRIES OF ASIA: STATE POLICY TOWARDS SMALL BUSINESS
 2.  V.N. ULYAKHIN
 3.  In Oriental countries the state actively influences the
 development of small enterprise, ensuring in fact equal possibilities
 for evolution for all sectors of economy, in all fields of
 activities, as concerns deliveries of scarce goods, allocation of
 investments, training of qualified personnel and the taxation, both
 direct and indirect.  Facing the necessity of prioritary development
 of science- and capital-intensive branches which would pay for
 themselves in the long run, developing countries of Asia finally
 succeed in finding such a compromise solution that foresees in the
 long-term perspective a join of increasing quantities of living and
 materialized labour, i.e. is based on combination of labour-,
 capital- and science-intensive productions and intended for
 well-balanced growth of small-scale, big capitalist and state
 sectors.
 4.  From this point, the experience of Asian countries is of a
 certain importance for developing small (in particular, co-operative)
 sector in the USSR. The recently adopted laws on the state
 enterprise, the co-operation and the individual labour activities
 meant a legal acknowledgement of such objective reality as the
 multi-sector nature of Soviet economy. However, the perestroyka in
 general has not shaken the monopoly of state property, and this makes
 possible negative processes in economy to grow without hindrance. The
 state sector still stays apart from any competition. Only secondary
 roles are still assigned to co-operative and self-employed workers.
 In the existing conditions they are not able to organize any
 important production while co-operators could successfully ensure,
 for instance, a small-series production of mini-tractors,
 mini-combines, electronic equipment and electrotechnical devices, as
 well as the small enterprises perform this function in practically
 all countries of Asia.  But this way is still firmly blocked by a
 deep-rooted dogma in our consciousness that proclaimed the state
 property to be a priori the height of perfection.
 Approved for Release
 e2~/
 C00174755
 Concatenated JPRS Reports, 1990
 Document 4 of 8
 5.  STANDARD OF NON-CAPITALIST DEVELOPMENT
 6.  M.A. OLIMOV
 Page: 11    of 26
 Page   2
 7.  One could not deny that the building of socialism in majority of
 socialist-oriented states was realized under strong influence of the
 Soviet experience which was advocated by our theorists as the basic
 model of socialism. They wrote piles of works pretending to give
 analysis of the non-capitalist way of development in Central Asian
 Soviet republics, recommended as a standard for young states of the
 "third world." However, these works were completely out of touch
 with reality, ignoring existing problems and difficulties. But
 recently, when monstrous distortions of socialist principles in
 Soviet Asian republics came to light, they puzzled many theorists of
 social sciences and party workers, unmasked complexity and
 contradictions of the real socialism and its ways.
 8.  In the author's opinion, we should admit that problems actually
 faced by the republics of Central Asia and Kazakhstan are similar to
 those of developing countries of the East (to some extent this
 includes also countries which develop on the capitalist way). Dangers
 that threaten these peoples in general are connected with accelerated
 path of historical development, negative influence of the whole
 underdevelopment in the pre-socialist period, the heritage of
 feudalism. The article scrutinizes a key problem of this
 heritage--the conservation and functioning of the traditional society
 in Soviet Asian republics.
 9.  The socialism built under Stalin's direction was itself a model
 of feudal community. Its features were paternalism, hierarchic and
 caste structure, use of a powerful compulsion machinery. In Central
 Asian republics the hierarchy of Stalin's socialism joined the
 hierarchy of the old feudal system. Institutes of traditional society
 which still remain attractive for masses, in the epoch of stagnation
 became a good camouflage for money-grubbing and corruption. Forcibly
 spread wage-levelling also contributed to the conservation of the
 feudal type community. The wage-levelling of the barrack-like
 socialism was close by nature to the feudal levelling and therefore
 easily took root in mass conscience.
 10.  AFRICA. DIFFERENT ORIENTATIONS AND COMMON PROBLEMS. ON SOCIAL
 AND ECONOMIC POLICY IN COUNTRIES OF ALTERNATIVE ORIENTATIONS
 12.  Scepticism towards possibilities of socialist-oriented policy in
 developing countries, which became widespread lately among Soviet
 researchers, is a sort of retroactive reaction to the overestimated
 C00174755
 Page: 12    of 26
 Concatenated JPRS Reports, 1990
 Document 4 of 8                                                  Page   3
 realities in the past. However, considering the capitalist and the
 socialist orientations of development we should not exaggerate their
 difference, which is strict enough in the political and ideological
 field but is less important in the social and economic sphere. This
 is quite natural, because the main tasks of overcoming backwardness
 faced by developing countries are similar if not identical.  Their
 essence is the accelerated creation of the potential for this
 overcoming, all possible development of productive forces, both
 material and human. This circumstance inevitably reduces the social
 and economic difference between the two alternative lines to
 non-significant variations in proportions of certain aims and methods
 of policy in countries of both orientations at the present stage.
 This thesis is confirmed in the article by a review of the policy of
 African states on main problems dealing with vital people's
 interests, i.e. the essential, human component of productive forces.
 13.  In the author's opinion, the degradation of social and economic
 situation on the continent in 1980s, connected in fact mainly with
 objective factors, cannot be explained merely by the
 socialist-oriented way. It would be wrong also to compare results
 achieved in countries of both types for a too short historical
 period; to consider measures of normalization as a deviation from the
 socialist orientation; to interpret this orientation as a stage of
 "building of socialism." This is a long-range policy, and its
 destinies are not determined by factors of conjuncture. Its necessary
 pre-conditions are the existence of a solid economic basis--the
 public sector of the economy, while not necessarily predominant, and
 the conviction of political leaders in a historical need for
 socialist orientation.
 14.  TURKISH ASPECTS OF TRUMAN DOCTRINE AND SOME MISTAKES OF
 STALINIST DIPLOMACY
 16.  While Greek events and the situation about Turkey were the
 occasion to proclaim the doctrine, its Greek and Turkish aspects
 haven't been yet a special subject of study in our country. However,
 the Truman doctrine played a crucial role in Aaerican-Turkish
 relations, in the choice by Turkey of its place in the post-war
 world, and this influenced, of course, the So-'iet-Turkish relations
 as well. The principles of the doctrine still stay the basis of
 bilateral relations between Turkey and the USA.
 17.  The author tried to reconsider the Soviet interpretation of the
 Truman doctrine. Now, when we review our past, it is useful to show
 consequences of the wrong approach by I.V. Stalin and his associates
 to the Soviet policy in the region.
 C00174755
 Page: 13    of 26
 Concatenated JPRS Reports, 1990
 Document 4 of 8                                                  Page   4
 18.  The Soviet-Turkish relations reached a high level of tension
 during first post-war years. In course of the second world war Turkey
 took in fact anti-Soviet positions, and after the war the Soviet
 government denounced the Treaty on friendship and neutrality between
 the two countries, signed in Paris in 1925, and suggested to prepare
 a new treaty. However, Soviet proposals that followed, aggravated
 even more the bilateral relations, contributed to the western
 orientation of Turkey. With approval of Stalin, Georgia and Armenia
 put in claims on the adjacent parts of Turkish territory.  In the
 course of the diplomatic discussion on the regime of the Black Sea
 straits between USSR, USA, Great Britain and Turkey, the Soviet party
 also raised claims unacceptable for the Turks, which resulted in
 drawing up of a common British-American-Turkish position.
 19.  SYNCRETISM OF RELIGIOUS AND MYTHOLOGICAL CONCEPTS OF PRE-MOSLEM
 TURKS
 21.  The article deals with insufficiently explored problem of
 various religious and mythological pre-Islam systems which functioned
 among Turkic peoples of Central Asia, Southern and Eastern Siberia.
 From the 6th century Turkic peoples began to form military, political
 and state unions of tribes. On their territories written texts were
 created, dealing with shamanism, Buddhism, Manichaeism and-
 Christianity. The adoption of Islam by Turks in Central Asia began in
 10th century, but this process was long, and during several centuries
 Turkic peoples lived in the sphere of other cultural and religious
 traditions.
 22.  Turkic manuscripts available for studying these pre-Islam
 conceptual systems are written by runic, Manichaean and Uighur
 scripts. They include special religious texts (prayers, hymns,
 instructions and norms of religious behaviour) as well as literary
 works (epitaphs, historical and heroic poems, didactic parables and
 novels).
 23.  A most peculiar feature of these works is the interaction of
 various religious and mythological traditions. Shamanic texts are
 influenced by the Manichaean religion (the runic fortune-telling
 book), Manichaean hymns are created under the influence of Buddhism.
 The syncretism of Manichaean and Buddhist ideas and notions reaches
 the level where Mani is identified with Buddha.  Manichaeism receives
 as well an impact of Christianity: in the prayer addressed to
 "Mani-Angel (and) Buddha" the word equivalent of "angel" means
 also "apostle." Turkic Christian texts were influenced by shamanism
 (the ritual formula of space description) and Manichaeism which
 000174755
 Page: 14    of 26
 .Concatenated JPRS Reports, 1990
 Document 4 of 8                                                 Page   5
 included in its turn some features of zoroastrianism.
 24.  SOCIAL AND POLITICAL VIEWS OF ABU-L-HASAN AL-MAVARDI (NEV TRENDS
 OF STUDIES)
 25.  A.A. IGNATENKO
 26.  Works created by this eminent Moslem medieval lawyer, expert on
 problems of the state, have been studied for a long time by
 orientalists. Modern islamists interpret the heritage of al-Mawardi,
 this distinguished theorist of the islamic state--caliphate, as being
 purely theocratic concept.
 27.  The notion of "concord" (ulfa) takes a key place in his
 concept aimed at giving explanation to the existence and functioning
 of society. This "concord" is necessary for people to receive
 "sufficient matter of their life" in the course of "development of
 the world" (imara). Human society is considered by the medieval
 theorist to be innerly differentiated: "unity in difference" is a
 pre-condition of "union" (i'tilaf) of people performing various
 functions in the process of "development of the world" (tillage,
 handicraft etc.)  and therefore needing one another.
 28.  Mutual hostility inherent in people by nature requires the
 existence of power to consolidate this union using the "religions"
 (din). Al-Mawardi reconsiders the notion of "religion" interpreting
 it as any set of society-organizing norms and rules, including even
 "dishonesty" (kufr) if it performs the function of uniting people.
 Norms of the "religion" interpreted in this way are obligatory both
 for subjects and the sovereign (malik), the supreme ruler who is to
 take measures to ensure the community life.
 29.  The article calls in question the authorship of the "Sermon to
 sovereigns," a well-known treatise whose manuscript is kept in the
 National Library of Paris, traditionally attributed to al-Hawardi.
 30.  ROLE OF SCALES OF TIME AND SPACE IN MODELLING OF HISTORICAL
 PROCESS
 32.  Rationality or irrationality of the history depends to a
 considerable extent on the scale applied to it. This idea was put
 forward in 1784 by E. Kant who noted the trend to all-world political
 unification. F. Schlegel, leaning upon the Indian experience, argued
 that there were no planetary time; each great culture went the way
 from revelation to rational constructions leading to a loss of
 creative impulse and to a decline. The model by Kant, in the final
 C00174755
 Page: 15    of 26
 Concatenated JPRS Reports, 1990
 Document 4 of 8                                                  Page
 analysis, can be traced back to Augustus and Jewish promise of
 Messiah, and the model by Schlegel-- to the Indo-European mythologem
 of four centuries (golden, silver, copper and iron). These models are
 not mutually excluding. Total historical movement has a complex inner
 structure including a number of movements, each of them being evident
 on a certain scale of articulation of historical time and space. The
 article distinguishes five scales of the time and the same number of
 scales for the cultural space. On the super-large scale of Indian
 mythology, the history in general is an illusion and only eternity is
 real. On a global large scale accumulated changes (growth of
 productive forces, of population, differentiation of society and
 intellect; growing alienation, ecological tension etc.)  are first
 and foremost. A middle global scale discerns wave movements, the 11
 eternal return," the revival of archaic features in the Middle Ages
 and of the classics in the modern history. In Chinese historiography
 this is expressed by an alternation of dynasties 'in and yan. On a
 middle local scale the most important are cycles of rise and decline
 of various cultures. These movements, while they are different
 enough, can be considered as being rational, easily modelled. They
 are opposed to explosive movements directed by a charismatic leader
 (M. Weber) or a group of "passionaries " (L.N. Gumilyov). Here only
 anthropomorphous scale is possible. There are no reasons to explain
 Mongolian conquests besides those interlaced in Gengis Khan's
 personality. It is impossible to foresee what new " passionary "
 (Hitler, Khomeini) will frustrate all plans of sober-minded people.
 However, the course of time smoothes away traces of explosions and
 all the logic of history is restored to its rights.
 33.  ROUND TABLE
 34.  FUTURE OF ECONOMIC HISTORY OF THE EAST
 35.  Participants: N.A. IVANOV, M.F. VIDYASOVA, L.S.  VASILIEV, YU.G.
 ALEKSANDROV, A.D.  DIKARYOV, V.A. YASHKIN, A.V. AKIMOV
 36.  This Round Table concerns problems of development of the
 economic history of the East in the USSR. The article by A.M. Petrov
 "New Tasks of Ancient Science and Some Materials for Study of
 Economic History of the East" (1989, No 2) gave rise to the present
 discussion.  The participants put the question: what is the reason of
 such a lag in the field (history of economy) which was traditionally
 considered by the marxist science as a priority? A number of
 solutions is suggested. In the authors' opinion, use of quantitative
 methods would allow to reject some dogmas which need to be reviewed,
 e.g. the dogma of the "robbery" of the East as a source of primary
 capitalist accumulation. The economic backwardness of the East was,
 first of all, a result of the non-ability of etatist economy to
 ensure the extended reproduction, and not that of the "colonial
 C00174755
 Page: 16    of 26
 Concatenated JPRS Reports, 1990
 Document 4 of 8                                                 Page   7
 robbery.-
 37.  A negative influence on the East, exerted by the West, was
 rather that the East actively rejected all western elements, becoming
 more and more archaic. However, one should not consider that
 modernization of the eastern economy is inevitably to lead to the
 death of traditional structures, pre-industrial civilization. The
 study of economic history of the East would help understanding
 economic problems of the USSR.
 38.  Results of the study of economic history could be applied for
 forecasting trends in the following fields: global problems, studies
 of economic growth and analysis of precedents.
 39.  UNIDENTIFIED FLYING OBJECTS (UFO) IN ANCIENT CHINA
 41.  The process of emancipation of thought in China in 1980s is
 particularly impressive after the spiritual vacuum of the epoch of
 "cultural revolution." The thirst of the whole society for
 knowledge based on the economic reforms, takes in a number of cases
 the form of unofficial science. An example of such organizations is
 the scientific societies of UFO fanciers with corresponding
 periodicals as the revue " Feidie Tansuo " ("Studies of Flying
 Saucers"). The efforts by Chinese scientists to find in ancient
 Chinese sources "historical evidences" of UPO' existence are of
 particular interest for Sinologists and experts in science of
 science. The activities of adherents of this new scientific trend in
 China demonstrate methodology and tasks of the Chinese historical
 science in general.
 42.  The article considers a number of concrete modern versions of
 interpretation of historical materials on extraordinary flying
 phenomena. A number of works criticizing the attempts to place a
 historical basis under this problem, as a rule, does not dispute the
 main modern concept of UFO as a product of alien mind.
 43.  COPYRIGHT: " Narody Azii i Afriki " . Izdatelstvo " Nauka"
 Glavnaya redaktsiya vostochnoy literatury, 1989

