 C001747051
 NATIONAL DEVELOPMENTS
 EYEWITNESS ACCOUNTS OF UFO SIGHTINGS PUBLISHED
 Harbin KEXUE SHIDAI [SCIENTIFIC AGE] in Chinese, No 5, Oct 1980 pp 5-7
 (Article by Jin Tao [6855 3947]:  "Sightings of Flying Saucers in China"]
 [Text]  Not only has a stream of reports of flying saucers come out abroad, but
 even in China reports of flying saucers have begun.
 The excerpts from letters printed below are reports of firsthand observations for
 which we express our sincere appreciation to the reporters.  Do flying saucers exist?
 Are they flying objects launched by superior forms of life on other celestial bodies
 in our galaxy?  We currently have no way of replying, but this does not stop us
 from studying and collecting clues no matter how tenuous they may be.
 On--24---September -1979 ,-a --report was -received fre  Yang_Xiuson  12799 4423 26461, teacher at a supplemental school in Tianjin's eastern suburbs:
 It was the autumn of 1943, possibly a day in September at some time after 1900
 hours in the evening at my native home in Qingxian.  I was enjoying myself In the
 courtyard when suddenly something flew across the sky from-east to. west' shining
 white light, but the light wave (the area covered) was not large.  Its center
 seemed like a saucer "revolving around a fixed point" in the sky.   When I saw it
 passing overhead, I ran up to the roof of the house at once to watch it, but it
 disappeared in about a minute.  Later on I heard that it had landed somewhere.  I
 think I was not the only one to see it at that time, and later on there was a lot
 of discussion about it, and it was said to be a new weapon that Japan had invented.
 On 25 September 1979, a report was received from Wang Xue'an [3769 1331 13441 of
 the Burmese Language Unit of the Beijing Foreign Languages Bureau.
 Around 1900 or 2000 hours on the evening of 18 September 1971, before the sky had
 entirely darkened and before the moon had come out, and not long after the students
 from Ji County in Hunan Province who were attending the May 7 Cadre School at the
 Foreign language Bureau in Beijing had eaten, everybody was in his room, some
 studying, some reading newspapers, some writing, and some chatting among themselves.
 Since I had nothing to do, I walked out the main entrance of the dormitory only to
 suddenly discover at a distance of about 2,000 or 3,000 meters up in the sky a huge
 lighted wheel slowly revolving in a clockwise direction while moving forward.  After
 I shouted, the people in their rooms came flying out to watch.  Unfortunately, when
 Approve for Release    S-3
 1
 C00174705
 I first discovered the lighted wheel, it had already passed over our cadre school
 and was located at a 60 to 80 degree angle to it.  It headed in a northwesterly di-
 rection away from us and slowly floated away.  This great flying wheel assumed the
 form of a smoke cloud, and it looked a little like a spiral nebula in pictures of
 heavenly bodies.  It emitted a yellowish light, but I heard no sound.  The center
 of this huge lighted wheel seemed thick while it became gradually thinner toward
 the edges.  Its speed of turning was quite slow, but its speed of forward motion
 was relatively fast.  I observed it for about one minute until it gradually dis-
 appeared across the horizon to the northwest.  All 10 of us kept looking at this
 extraordinary phenomenon until we could see it no longer.
 On 27 September 1979, a report was received from Liu Taiquan [0491 3141 1557], a
 graduate in the 79th class of No 2 Middle School in Chengyang Municipal Middle
 On 23 October 1977, I wandered the streets and lanes listening to adults chatting.
 It was almost dusk when suddenly someone pointed at the sky and said: "Look! What
 is that?"  Everyone looked up at the sky.  We saw only a globe shape (dark yellow
 in color) spinning there and moving forward vary rapidly.  It remained within our
 sight for only a minute or so (though we watched until it disappeared).  Out of
 curiosity, I recorded the incident in my middle school arithmetic book, and this is
 what I wrote.  "At 6:45 pm on 23 October 1977, the direction of flight was from north
 to south."
 On 29 September 1979, the Shaanxi Branch of the Chinese Academy of Sciences forward-
 ed a report from Wang Yongjun [3769 0516 6511], third year student in the Department
 of History at Shaanxi Teachers University:
 During summer vacation this year on an afternoon in early August (between 1600 and
 1700 hours, the sky was dark blue and utterly cloudless when my mother and I cleaned
 up some wheat that had been left out for sunning.  Suddenly we discovered coming
 directly out of the west a basically globe shaped (its edges were irregular) thing
 like a fireball, revolving and flying toward the southeast.  It was yellow, red and
 white in color, but yellow predominated with red next, an9 finally white.  The
 center of the globe had the shape of a tongue of flame that constantly changed, but
 the tongue of flame did not extend outside the body of the globe.  It flew forward
 at an even speed (faster than an airplane but slower than a meteorite) without stop-
 ping and without any apparent increase in altitude.  The object flew for about a
 minute until it suddenly disappeared without trace in a southeasterly direction.
 The object was ;arger than a wash basin but smaller than a sieve.
 Point of observation:  Shunting Second Brigade, Dizhang Commune, Ji.anyang City.
 On 28 February 1979, a report waS; received from Wang Zhen 13769 72011, second year
 student in the Department of Ck?:'  se language at Gansu Teachers University:
 It was probably one day in August 1977 when I was at fiaidunzi in Jingtai County,
 Wuwei Prefecture, Gansu Province.  At the time, I. was a trade union cadre in the
 Yinzhen Textile Mill in Gansu Province, and I had just .arrived rorether with a
 group of employees from the mill, at a farm operated by the mill where we '.ere going
 to join in the wheat harvest (at approximately 104.5? E. 37.5? W.)
 CO
 0174705
 That evening a movie was being shown in a unit at the southern edge of our farm,
 and many of the people from our farm went to see it.  It was already quite late
 when I went (probably between 2030 and 2100 hours).  It was already dark and stars
 flickered in the sky.  Visibility was excellent, and the open countryside stretched
 as far as the eye could see.  I and two other colleagues walked along together,
 examining the magnificent star-studded sky as we walked.  Since childhood, I have
 been quite fond of astronomy, and while a primary school student in Shanghai, I
 joined the astronomy section of the municipal youth science and technology guidance
 station.)  Suddenly, the attention of all three of us was attracted by a marvelous
 flying object.  Since it was so peculiar, everyone seemed frightened, held their
 breaths, and made not a sound.  A very large flying object emitting a milky white
 strong light flew soundlessly over our heads, flying off to our right side at not
 too great a speed, going from north to south.  Our first impression was that it was
 not far from us (the surface of the ground), because if most of the stars may be
 said to be as large as a "sesame seed," the flying object was as big as "a one-cent
 nickel coin" (or else if it was distant from us, it was extremely large).  It was
 rotating (but I have forgotten the direction of rotation), and it had a power source
 that emitted light.  The light was very bright but not eye-piercing.  The light
 beam shone down in a whorl-like shape (like smoke rings) as the body of the flying
 objected revolved.  Each ring came out in about 1 or 2 seconds.  This flying object
 seemed to be multi-storied, because it did not look like a circular iron cake but
 rather like the cover for an enamel mug, and because it gave me the feeling that in
 addition to the light projected downward as it rotated, that the light from other
 small points of light were even brighter than that light beam.   The entire flying
 object was shrouded in a vapor-like light that was a little less bright than the
 whorl-shaped light beams that shows down from the rotation, and the flying object
 was--not_-flat.__
 Within about one-half to one minute, it disappeared over the horizon to the front
 of us (the south).
 On 5 October 1979, a report was received from Wang Ziteng [3076 5261 7506], of the
 Athletic Commission in Handan Prefecture, Hebei Province:
 One evening during the summer of 1958 at around 2000 or 2100 hours, I was in my
 hometown of Wangjiacun, Boyang County, Jiangxi Province.  I was outside the main
 entrance to the courtyard enjoying the cool air, when suddenly I heard several
 housewives shout, "It's bad.  It's a bad omen!"  Some picked up vegetable knives,
 and some held sticks with which they beat an the bamboo bed in an effort to drive
 away the "monster"!
 The "monster" was round in shape and able to emit red light and blue, and white
 colored light.  Its speed of flight was not too fast, and it. was, perhaps, somewhat
 more than 10 zhang high.....
 On 6 October 1979, Li Hong 12621 3163]. of the 205 team (Gaoling County, Shaanxi
 Province) of the No 2 Composite Prospecting Brigade of the headquarters of the
 State Geology Bureau reported:
 In 1977, we were working in Luonan Prefecture in Shaanxi Province.  It was probably
 toward nightfall in the middle of October (I can't remember the exact time, but I
 C00174705
 can find out if necessary).  Many people had congregated in front of the stage to
 watch a play, when suddenly there appeared in the sky an orange-yellow, revolving,
 disk-shaped dlying object, which slowly moved from the northwest toward the south-
 eastern horizon in the course of from one to two minutes.  At Yongfeng, many fellow-
 villagers also came rushing out to look in response to shouts of alarm.  After our
 team dispersed, it was said that some people in Gaoling had also seen this pheno-
 menon, and quite a few people believe they had seen it.
 On 10 October.1979, a report was received from Wang Bsoebeng 13769 1405 3932] at
 the people's printing Plant in Baoji, Shaanxi Province:
 In August 1977 while I was at Shujiagou, Miaoc""swan Brigade, at the foot of Wu
 Mountain in the Xinj ie Commune of Baoji County, I saw a strange star.  On the
 afternoon of this day just as night was falling, the sky was exceptionally clear;
 the heavens were filled with stars, and there were no clouds.  Five of us including
 Li Donglin 12621 2639 2b51], Huang Aizhong 178J6 1947 1813], and Liang Zhike [2733
 1807 4430] had just ringed the table to eat.  When I raised my head, suddenly I
 saw a strange star fly over the tops of our heads, and I immediately excitedly told
 everyone to look.  We saw only that it belched smoke and shot out tongues of flame
 as it rotated off to the south.  This thing was about as large as a small basin, and
 it disappeared from view within about one minute.
 On 14 October 1979, a report was received from Liu Genji 10491 2704 10153, worker
 at the transportation repair plant of the 71 Roadbed Construction Company, Tongzhou
 City, Shaanxi Province:
 It was probably during the wheat harvest season of 1970 or 1971 in Chengguan Pre-
 fectu-re,--Tongzhou-City. ---(I__can't--remember--f-or sure_just when-I went to live and work
 at the.. production team there).  I and two other young men were on the road back to
 the production team after having delivered some vegetables to the procurement
 station.  (It was already around 2100 hours).  When I looked up at the sky over my
 head, there was a fogs; kind of cloud that was very white and semi-transparent.
 The sky was clear at the time, and I didn't-see the moon nor any other clouds.  I
 had never seen such a semi-transparent misty cloud before, and I was very curious
 about it.     As I pulled the two-wheeled cart along, I looked upward at it and told
 my buddies about it.  After about 20 seconds, a wheel that looked like a globe
 emerged from it, which was about as big as the full moon when it first rises on the
 day of the mid-autims- festival.  It was very bright and moved ahead slowly and
 rotated upward.  It then stopped at what I would guess was about 200 meters away
 and was slowly enveloped by a semi-transparent misty cloud and became no longer
 visible.  Along the line of its flight a mist lingered ouch as comes out of a jet
 airplane exhaust.  My guess about its height is that it was substantially the same
 as the height of the moon when it comes up.  We walked for about two li, and it
 also rotated away behind the western hills like the moon, maintaining the same speed
 throughout.  If it had not spurted out a misty cloud, I might have supposed that it
 was the moon moving faster than usual.
 C00174705
 t out to the
 After returning  o the productio around.  Thereewere and funloading                             the
 wheat fields s to to look
 team leader.  I asked the team leader whether he had seen the situation in the
 ahdipe
 sky, and the team lead-and waetglthey eamingdwhall en it first rose ha a ands
 of the eastein hills
 per, but they didn't pay any attention later on.
 9432
 CSO:  4008

