 -000175747
 Page: 1     of 2
 FBIS Concatenated Daily Reports, 1992
 Document 5 of 9                                                  Page   1
 Classification:   UNCLASSIFIED       Status:        [STAT)
 Report Type:      Daily report       Report Date:.
 Report Number:    FBIS-EEU-92-209    UDC Number:
 Headline:  Belgrade Radio Suggests Croats Using Aircraft
 FULL TEXT OF ARTICLE:
 1.  [Editorial Report) Belgrade Radio Beograd Network in
 Serbo-Croatian at 1400 GMT on 27 October carries its regular
 45-minute newscast, which includes several reports on the situation
 in Bosnia-Hercegovina.
 2.  In his report from Sarajevo, Risto Djogo says that "today,
 snipers are still seeking victims.  It was relatively calm last night
 also, apart from the artillery fire Muslim forces opened from Mojmilo
 Hill and Alipasino Polje against Nedjarici and Kasindol Street.-
 3.                  The studio announcer cites correspondent Ratomir Milovic as
 having reported about "fierce clashes around the confluence of the
 Lim and the Drina Rivers.  The goal of the Muslim forces is to
 destroy the Visegrad hydroelectric power plant."
 4.  In his report from Bihac, Milan Pantovic says that `for several
 nights already, flights of so-far unidentified aircraft [letilicaj
 have been registered over Kordun, or, to be more precise, the regions
 around the Kupa River and over the Cazin Krajina.  What is involved
 are not flying saucers but aircraft that are circulating over the
 positions held by the forces of the Republic of Serbian Krajina.  The
 speed of the flights is about 450 kilometers per hour.  The altitude
 of as much as 4.5 km tells experts that what is involved here are
 more modern aircraft with mainly reconnaissance tasks.  That this is
 a part of some Croatian plans is clearly shown from the fact that
 since the aircraft started appearing over Serbian territory, the
 Croatian media have started carrying reports about planes taking off
 from the Banja Luka airport."
 5.  In his report from Trebinje, Dragan Mihovic says that "according
 to all available information, the agreement on a cease-fire on the
 Dubrovnik-Hercegovina battlefield that has come into force at 1200
 today is being respected."
 Approved for Release
 UNCLASSIFIED                   ,),010

