 2.  Be vastta!                                               who via aoseoemit.
 tsl on the subject of W0 a.    a ?t anttst who carved as tramslstor.
 ? radio astronomer, saphattcslly vtated that be know Of 80 lightifts
 of 00's to the USSR asd added with a levab that it they ware Only sees
 to the i3, they must -e of Soviet ?risla.
 3.  At the                                     es of the satronoeara ntattosed
 that she had bear  of so" sightlagn of unidentified objects Dear the
 Caucasus.  She is, unaware of any study being made of them but wait epes-
 atnded as the subject.
 ..  The                not" visit was to                 who was very later-
 toted in the problem.  Be nad read wenie+ a book (which ban been trans-
 toted into Russian) but did not accept bin eoaelustons.knew
 of come sttbtlags to the northern part of the USSR, but sold that re-
 ports of Such sightless are net printed Sc Soviet newspaper* because
 they are not retarded me scientific observations.     Co  eats  this to
 tntareatins to view of the readtraes of Soviet newspapers to prtu't ra-
 ther fesesatte reports of hypotheses and observations" suggested by the
 more tcaslnative members of the scientific coax atty.  Apparently sage
 offteial sanction to needed.) ~-haa bean interested is SJr re-
 port, of UFO's and readily accepts their reality.                                                                     I& fact, it Is bte
 perannal opinloe that the =IS nay oritteate as Veavs.  tie to veil
 aware e: the sesstive eatct of "enlightened" scienttiae opinion on
 the irterpretatias of caestioaable obeervatiens as he has had personal
 S.  At the                                     lttelo isNrue ta_sb.   far
 serious. reddish object fLdlms tbsauph the ally that they wars, 40"Ineed
 was neither a astetltta tar a sataortto. foetter, thou Mediate ta-
 ht have beau a lsagamat at a metal-
 t mi
 b
 hi
 g
 jec
 s o
 a teas that t
 terprstatto                                                 ,its or roekat roturatep free orbit. berstsp gip is the area phare.
 thought that M's had boas Gus is the DSSR but he amid mat be opestfis
 as to locatioaa sod sbarectertstisa.
 ~.  ac the                                           again little Interest
 was abow     a of no isssssessss,                tine with the group eta-
 ttaned by        d confirmed ton abserrst s? of ? paatttar Object.  to
 did set discuss the expartasta is detail but dearly had bass struck by
 the posribtltty that the object sttlh. have bass a "saowt.?
 7,  at the y                   these vas eosddmrabla interest.
 The institute teeltdea                           - presidd our by
 novenas, the fat Cal disewm .ace O  the probls was with
 rector at the isstitto.             as too had read Maatel'i
 but considered It M adequate eatraet of the aabjesi which be
 book
 ,
 Consequently fall was stored.  is indicated that sr a servetioes at t70's
 bad has. ads by his staff and that Choy bad received w repasts of such
 obaarvattocs. 8avmvor, whom rho roomed" to tadtnate the
 results of itetmeaald'a critical at y e      pnblss,_tedtly cas-
 caded that there tight to sate to It and estluded by status that it
 was "elaarly still NO apse queettas."
 8.  Another astronomer w  now that is the northern part of.Trsabbatas
 there had has. t pt.scd siMhtit=a of ball lipbtstap.
 INAIMPIMA east. r. t." c,K to totes  pets and disxvers  e d wOat ee,;
 wing seta wens rsf*c                                                       ola of antodbile headlights fret an isversiss
 f.  Later, s discussion was held with              lls Cos not very Impressed
 with !teasel's book, but mss also sot    reseed vtth the sipottteasee of
 the phenomenon.  It is possible Chat moos tatsreat vss hailed td-t sight
 lead to additional tavaatipsttoas.
 10.  1 stellar speotasseopta                        via also istarested to this
 van   so   osactsYld with *aaal'a book and felt that
 there Was deftaltely mew "asity far additional Wes..
 11.  Us general faaltap one sots to that to Official troatesnt of the Dp0
 problem has been Sivas to the IM.  lmstsad people rotor to the tS
 work, priacipsll 1lceasl's book, to demonstrate the absence of net
 scientific proble..a.  At the *me time, then to as almost satvareal
 swareaeoe of the history mad ebataetardattee of the pbee+.wotoom Often as.
 saciatd with ssnsidarmble interest. The result is that a yasiestratias
 of the tsadagwey of = Official oxplassttasa soughed with some proof Of..
 the reality of the sbsarvatteas sight exette osthvsioso aRs rapidly
 .aging Soviet sstrewsers tLa Sam their hii onotegarts who we onto
 atrortli tnflwsesd by the official ridicule associated with 17O'a to
 00015273'

