 C00015363,.                  %-~
 .}                  Q
 ~?
 Office ZVfe 20YG112' ZL 2 ? UNITED STATES GOVERNMENT
 TO     =                  Assistant Director, Scientific T_ntelliConco    DATE 8 December 1$$3
 MOM    :                  Chief, Operations Staff, 0/SI
 suo)scra          F.dport on Book Entitled "Flying Saucers from Outer Space"
 1.  As requested, the subject book was revisac.i b,; one of
 our consultants with particular roterance to possible security
 violations concerning CIA's part in the flying saucer investigation.
 Partinent co nento of this consultant are as tollovai
 a. "TPhe bait itself is highly readable, but the content
 is h%hly, distorted and tilled with so r Any halt-truths
 and inferences that I teal pertain that the author to
 1oso:ring.y cossetting a perpetration. Peominent in the book
 is one Albert :,i. Chap, an Air Fares (Reserve) Public
 Snforrstion Officer uhe was on duty ut the Pentagon "rtil
 recently returning to inactive duty.. The author, Keyhoe,
 rulcas extensive use of Chop's statements and in-plios that
 the Air Pore. is deliberately concealing positive con-
 clusions from the publics
 be  "CLt is nentioned several tines on page 242 of the
 bcak -- nowhere else.  Ferhas states here that a friend of
 hit, .tth hi;h level roontaotsr, told him about February 17,
 1753, thatt
 (1) OIL 'people' advised the Atv. Fares to put out
 a report debun:inx the saucers, tell'the public the
 project was ended and then carry it on underground,
 Top Secret.
 (2) Sam of the 'intelliCence boyar were mad
 as the devil at CXA for even sugCesting?the above actions
 a.  "CIA is supposed to have made thnsoreaorstendations
 fanatical saucer 'believer' as "dubunkingI.  I:otiuever,, there
 was certainly no iecornendation that su;Costed hiding any
 inforration fret the public.
 follou_n5 a 'secret high level briefing'.  Therb is no
 apparent lanotirledCe of the CYA panel reoti,n,?,s elthouuh the
 Ianol'e rocor.noncations nie;ht have been interpreted by a
 C00015363
 Q
 d.  -Therefore, l'.eyhoe, 'saving built. up a 'case' for
 saucers bcin.; interplanetary, insists that the Air Force
 (and CII:) laser the 'truth' and are.rctusing to give the
 public the facts.
 e. "I saw Dr. Stefan T. Poscony (Chief, USM111 Special
 Study Group) recentlyo  lie was not attars of any particular
 concern in the Penta?on over weyhoers assertions.  However,
 it ni5ht be wise to check directly with the officer who
 replaced Major,Cewey Fourtut in Current Intelli.Conos.  i
 believe his name is Smt:th. Part of his duties are to follow
 all reports of sirhtir.gs of U.''.0.'s.         '
 S.  "As to the poseibil+ty'of a security breach, it is
 difficult to say. I auspoct that Chop heard of Cxits being
 briefed but that no leak occurred regarding the O, I Panel."
 2. It is believed that no security breach is involved and
 any investigation of this book would only serve to focus additional,
 attention on an cbvicus bit of sensational roiance "fiction".
 :Ct In reaomonded, therefore, that no further action regarding the
 book be initiated by this office.
 Distributiant
 l - Forward
 I - Exec
 I - 8V
 1- 3D
 1 - Subject
 I - Chrono
 1 - Daily Reading
 P. 4. STAOI.'Q

