 "C00175748
 FBIS Concatenated Daily Reports, 1992
 Document 7 of 9                                                 Page   1
 Classification:   UNCLASSIFIED       Status:        [STAT]
 Document Date:     26 Aug 92         Category:      [CAT]
 Report Type:      Daily report       Report Date:
 Report Number:    FBIS-SOV-92-170    UDC Number:
 Headline:  New Weapons, Aircraft Displayed at Air Show
 Source Line:  LD2808100492 Moscow Radio Moscow in French 1600 GMT 26
 Aug 92
 FULL TBST OF ARTICLE:
 1.  [Excerpt) For one week, civilian and combat planes and
 helicopters displayed their abilities in the skies near Moscow, while
 some 300 Russian and foreign firms displayed their latest products to
 visitors at a huge airport near the town of Zhukovskiy. Some of the
 aircraft had radical new designs suggestive of flying saucers. The
 Russian aerospace industry presented the TU-160 strategic bomber,
 which carries air-to-surface missiles, the IL-102 ground attack
 aircraft, the SU-27M fighter aircraft, and many specialized aircraft
 for sports, fire fighting, and agriculture. Visitors were able to see
 the C-300 antiaircraft rocket launcher, which has interested foreign
 specialists for years but until now had been classified as a top
 secret weapon. Its designer, Boris Kodriatsev, describes the
 potential of the C-300 unit:
 2.  [Begin Kodriatsev recording in Russian, fading into French
 translation) On the whole, we have reason to believe that the system
 is superior to the American Patriot system. It also has the advantage
 of being able to fly anywhere, while Patriots can only fly in the
 direction of the orientation of the launcher. [end recording)
 3.  Among new products there is the MIG-31, nicknamed the mini-AVACS
 in comparison with the famous American reconnaissance aircraft. The
 chief designer, Rostislav Beliakov, describes its potential:
 4.  [Begin Beliakov recording in Russian, fading into French
 translation] It has advantages as a weapon: It has a very advanced
 detection system allowing it to sweep a large beam, 900-km wide, for
 four aircraft. [end recording]
 5.  According to well-informed sources, (Obovono) Export and Avia
 Export signed a number of agreements on the supply of military
 aircraft and equipment during the MosAeroshow-92 exhibition. [passage
 omitted)
 UNCLASSIFIED         Approved for Release
 ~jIal0

