 "Uffi5e'                   eroran       ? UN  ED STATES GOVERNMENT.
 TO    , Assistant Director, 31
 PROM  i Chief, PiOrsica & ZLectronics rf vision,. SI
 su5JecT. Unidentified Flying Objects
 DA-928 3 July 1953
 1. Reference is cads to your aaemarand*a of 2? May 1953, subject
 as above, which assigned to this Division the rosponsibility "tor
 taints-lxdn c=rent knowledge of reports of sightings of unidentified
 f?71^.g objects."
 2.  Since the referenced pen orandr % 'c c not atiptu ate the priority
 of this project versus the nurnnl responsibilities of this Division,
 nor indicated the depth or scope of required lm @W .edge, the Divisions
 has reviewed the status of the project, its present rothod of handling
 and its poasibla timeliness or role tionsh p to the current productive
 intelligence activities of the DtviuIgn. the r  ow involved lstternal.  ,,,, ~~
 disousrione with ASD pereo:.sein wit   . Hookert C X with USIA'      h    ^'"
 persaar l and pith renters of the So etifio P.o n Board called by
 CIA last year.
 inclu~'4nr a costa ana7,,"sf a of all incoming sa orastion and the aorre-
 spend . g 7.iaison with the sources would require oonU cur efforts of
 two a ulysts, a s`,.Lu o:e is and is considerable t$paal load*
 _  k.  TA view of the ::Adinle of the Board thata close Ingestion
 to u :era: atoteitg. and that noifl "nation has'haen_obtotaod since
 `                                       ..-.w
 oos:lu: a::.'utr                                            ,   .r,,~.,...
 a. the project wilX be ocnddered an inactive
 sogre rte references to recognisable and expistaable phenomena
 flying objects"
 in the tiles for future reference unless it raises an fawadiately,
 r ocotrisable problem of concern to national, security'.
 5. With the above premise it is planned to hurdle the projec ,
 filing :acilitics, ono additional filing cabinet viii be requested.
 yp                                                                    N

