 C00215913
 IUlrIIOit;  Vitolntyck, It. (Director)
 ORC:  none
 TITLE:      Flying phcnorena (UFO's)
 SO::rCF:    Sovetskaya Latviya, no.
 e
 TOPIC TAGS:   unidentified flying
 287, 10. Dec 67, p. 3,
 object, optics
 / ZSTMC1' :
 The director of the Station for the Radio Observation of the Ionosphere
 and Artificial?Earth Satellites R. Vitolniyek reports that recently there
 are :ere and more reports in the Soviet and foreign press,of strange
 luminescent objects in the fora of balloons and convex discs being
 obeerved in the sky.  As yet, it Is impossible to give a definite answer
 as to the nature of those phenomena.  While some have already been
 ,explained, the radar cbservattens have-sometimes showed objects in the
 form of an Ideal circle tens of kilometers high that could not be. eom tired with any known object, such as sputniks, meteorological rockets,
 etc.  "Flying saucers" have also appeared many times over the territory             _.
 of the USSFT, and quite recently in I.epaya. ?Eye-witness reports suggest j,             {)
 iha'c lit vas not a mirage, but an actual? "flying ?saueer."  According to
 1           apparently according to its altitude.  Its surface is dull '(pea sly),  ?
 rather than brilliant. --Inasmuch as the body of the =
 Ls-of~cn deriver
 `tan the surrounding medium, It may be concluded that it is capable, in
 a certain sta;c of evolution, of absorbing clectrenavnctte waves  at
 ? like core in the center.  The object changes color from red to blue,
 L
 ? astrophysicists, such an object would be of gigantic-.ize with a ball-
 Cb)C3
 '           ...   in why the Ps dioustrophysienl?Laboratory of the Latvian Academy of    r
 Sciences re.iucstu that all persona,. Ltncxsing UFO phenomena report their  /
 observations to-that outer..                                           Y"'
 Cb~C~~                                                                   cb)C3~
 various aengtas which fall on its surface.  As a result, under favorable
 conditions, the. object can beccae practically invisible.  When discussing
 the origin of the UFO a "very mportant-?oint Iz eftea.forgo tten.
 -
 Irvar
 iably, the flying, object is tracked by radar, and it is possible                                 that this could lead to false reports of missile-attacks.  Therefore,
 to avoid errors when tracking a flying object, 'its properties must be
 fknovn.  According to many specialists, the most probable theory is that
 IS FO's are luminescent plasma formations of colossal size, similar to
 :ball Lighting.  This assumption makes it possible to explain most of
 their properties, including the cause of their appearance precisely over
 large cities where the air is saturated with electromagnetic radiation.
 Regarding hypotheses of UFO'.s being messengers from other planets, this
 Is still very doubtful, although there is no weighty.,reason to discard
 them categorically.  Ile any rare, a.thorough research is indicated.  That
 Approved f 9r Release
 ao1o

