 000174678
 Page: 1     of 28
 Concatenated JPRS Reports, 1992
 Document 5 of 20                                             Page   1
 Classification:    UNCLASSIFIED      Status:       [STAY]
 Docwient Date:     16 Jun 92         Category:     [CAT]
 Report Type:       JPRS report       Report Date:
 Report Number:     JPRS-UEQ-92-010   UDC Nuber:
 Author(s):  Vladimir Lagovskiy]
 Headline:  Sensation: Flight to Alpha-Centaurus
 Source Line:  927F0248A Moscow RABOCHAYA TRIBUNA in Russian 16 Jun 92
 p 3
 Subslug:  [Article by Vladimir Lagovskiy]
 FULL T88T OF ARTICLE:
 1.  [Article by Vladimir Lagovskiy]
 2.  [Text] ...On  "Flying Saucer"
 3.  For starters, let us acknowledge this fact. The rumors that the
 military industrial complex which actually owns the Scientific
 Production Association (NPO) of Experimental Machine Building is
 rather seriously interested in  "flying saucers "  are justified. I am
 looking at a document. It is entitled,  " A Protocol of the Test
 Results of an Exploratory Flying Vehicle Motion Method."  At the top, _
 -           -
 as- i~t -should "he; - t -ls -~a=kea--' iConcur" ~tTi a signature o~ the
 deputy commander of the military unit and an official seal. This is
 followed by the test date, test location, and the object of testing.
 And the purpose. As for the latter, it says that the experiments are
 carried out in order to assess the effect of moving a bulk
 high-T<inf>c<reset> superconductor under the effect of a fast
 electron flux on it according to a flying vehicle research program
 developed by the Scientific Production Association of the X and Y
 military units.
 4.  I am quoting these data in such detail not without reason.
 Stereotypes are still deeply embedded here.  Many still think that if
 you have  "saucers,"  then you must have aliens. And if you have
 aliens, then it is garbage. Yet for a change, this is a rather
 serious affair.  We are talking not about fantastic hypotheses but
 about a real breakthrough in technology and basic knowledge.  The
 "protocol "  is not a sole witness to this. There are also patents,
 authors' certificates, and patent and invention claims.
 5.   " We are offering,"  says the senior fellow of the Scientific
 Production Association of Experimental Machine Building, Candidate of
 Technical Sciences Vasiliy Shabetnik,  " a principally new method of
 moving in space.  And we can demonstrate it. "
 Approved for Release   ~~
 UNCLASSIFIED   ~  ~~
 000174678
 Page: 2     of 28
 Concatenated JPRS Reports, 1992
 Docuwent 5 of 20                                             Page   2
 6.  ...Here is the so-called  "Mohammed's tomb''-a saucer-shaped
 object from a cooled superconductor freely levitating in a magnetic
 field.  Almost all developers of superconducting compounds used to
 "experiment"  with this trick. As for the enthusiasts, it infused
 them with creativity. They thought that it would be possible to hover
 over the earth in the same way in some miracle vehicle. It is
 possible. There are no theoretical obstacles to this. Yet there is a
 problem: upon close examination, the generally sound idea runs into
 impenetrable technical difficulties.
 7.  For example, in order to ascend in the geomagnetic field of our
 planet, it is necessary to create an incredibly strong magnetic
 intrinsic field around the  "saucer.'' Yet this is far from simple
 even with superconductors. But let us assume that it is possible by
 some means; how shall we then move in space? There fs a special
 problem with magnetic fields there.
 8.  The vehicle must be equipped with additional sustainer engines,
 the enthusiasts were explaining away. This of course is a way
 out...yet would the game be then worth the candles?
 9.  In other words, for reasons easy to understand, many experts
 thought such methods of travel to be rather hypothetical than real.
 And then they found a solution. A simple one, as a solution should
 be _ __
 10.  ...An experimental unit. A fast electron flux. It emerges from
 an accelerator and speeds past the superconductor model. So, the
 "lohammed's tomb'' instantaneously Sumps to the side. Bven the eye
 cannot catch its swift motion.
 11.   "Now imagine a real space vehicle,"  Shabetnik says. Its
 airframe is covered with a high-T<inf>c<reset> superconductor. Fast
 electron emitters are installed circularly around it. The charged
 particles will be streamlining around the vehicle and by moving will
 create both a current and an electromagnetic field. So, the field and
 the current will be simultaneously induced in the superconducting
 layer.  What will happen? The fields and the currents will begin to
 interact with Ampere's force. Simply speaking, their carriers will be
 repelled from each other. And this is undoubtedly more efficient than
 the interaction of a simple electromagnetic field of the vehicle with
 the earth's geomagnetic field. The vehicle will soar, as if floating
 in the electron medium which it itself created around itself.
 12.  The sphere is a perfect shape for interstellar travel. Yet for
 moving in an atmosphere, it is difficult to find.,anything better than
 the  "saucer."  Consequently, it will probably be necessary to
 000174678
 Page: 3     of 28
 Concatenated JPRS Reports, 1992
 Document 5 of 20                                             Page   3
 develop a variable-geometry device. Starting from the surface would
 require a rather modest outlay of electric force. About 100 A will be
 sufficient for a 5-ton vehicle. It would be also easy to maneuver it
 by increasing or decreasing the current along its sides.
 13.  ...From Superconductor
 14.  In essence, the scientists are suggesting an electromagnetic
 means of conveyance, albeit modified in principle.  There fs no doubt
 in the principle itself. But would it be possible to realize it in
 practice? ~1e need superconductors. The best one-for -80?C-would
 suffice in space.  The temperature there is much lower. Yet in the
 atmosphere, this threshold is insufficient.
 15.   "Haven't you forgotten,"  Vladimir Dmitriyevich is musing,
 "that we suggested a superconductor which maintains zero
 conductivity at 850?C? "
 16.   " No, I haven't forgotten. But this is still in the exploratory
 stage.   "
 17.    "Yea, exploratory. But quite real."
 18.    Shabetnik and his colleagues are certain that they have
 discovered new fundamental patterns in the structure of matter. This
 -----
 _ cv - - --- --       - -     p       p - P -
 ge ena - es-them~o ex-lawn-the  ro emotes off-matte=
 differently from the way it has been done thus far-on the basis of
 the statistical and probabilistic concepts. They suggested a more
 natural approach.
 19.  For example, the researchers have demonstrated that the physical
 parameters of all elements depend on the quantity and state of the
 elementary particles in them. They also managed to establish the
 shape and structure of these building blocks. It turned out that in
 the physical world surrounding us, everything is subject to precise
 calculation: from the boiling point and entropy to superconductivity-
 a phenomenon discovered yet still not explained from the viewpoint of
 the old notions. And whenever precise calculation is possible, it is
 possible to design substances with given properties. Thus, the
 scientists at first theoretically predicted the existence of
 superconductors with a -80?C critical temperature. Then they
 developed it. And the result precisely confirmed the theory. And now
 there is a project for an 850? [superconductor] and there is no
 reason to doubt that it, too, will succeed.
 20.   " I won't disclose all the secrets,"  Shabetnik says,  "but will
 give you a hint that the new superconductor can .be based on plain
 iron. The trick is in the energy order of the remaining element
 000174678
 Page: 4      of 28
 Concatenated JPRS Reports, 1992
 Document 5 of 20                                                 Page   4
 position."
 21.   "Okay, but what kind of fuel are you going to use to go into
 space? "  I collected myself to ask.
 22.  ...And Almost With Perpetual Motion
 23.   " Vill you put a nuclear or fusion reactor on the space vehicle?
 Or will you turn to the energy of the vacuum? "
 2b.   "Neither one of the three,"  Vasiliy Dmitriyevich responds.
 "Do you recall another sensation which was trumpeted roughly at the
 same time as high-temperature superconductivity? It was reported that
 the so-called  "cold fusion "  was discovered in the United States.
 Then this phenomenon was replicated in many laboratories throughout
 the world. That it was replicated yet again could not be explained.
 And why? Simply because they were trying to find the features of
 fusion reactors where they couldn't be found.
 25.   " I remember these experiments vividly. I even observed one of
 those at Moscow State University. Ajar with heavy water, two live
 electrodes, and all of a sudden, additional heat, as if from nowhere.
 And if its source is not `cold fusion,' then what was it?
 26.   "We call this phenomenon `energy conversion.' And the jar
 --itself ""is -a primitive converter- model: ~a~er "bo-i1s in it---Using ~~ie ----- --
 scientific-language, we are dealing with a phase transition. Yet in
 this case the water particles are moving in an orderly fashion due to
 an electric field. And in such cases, according to our theory, phase
 transitions result in an increase in the energy release. The gain is
 some 2.12-4.2 times greater than the work spent..
 27.   "Wait a second, wait a second,"  I am trying to interrupt what
 I have just heard,  "Are you talking about perpetual motion? "
 28.   " No, we are talking about extracting the inner energy of the
 matter."
 29.   "And can it be used in any way? "
 30.   " Be my guest. You can even design power plants instead of the
 traditional ones. Yet I must repeat that it would be an extremely
 primitive one-boiling water...and of course, such a converter is not
 suitable for space flights.
 31.   "iTe have already found an electrical analog of the processes
 during which energy conversion occurs " , Shabetnik continues.  "And
 it can be extracted not from water but from, say, metal. Suppose you
 000174678
 Page: 5     of 28
 Concatenated JPRS Reports, 1992
 Docuaent 5 of 20                                              Page   5
 plug our converter into an electric generator. So on the output you
 produce four times as much energy as it can generate operating in a
 traditional fashion. You use one-quarter of that for generator power
 supply and the remainder is available to you as a gift from the
 microcosm."
 32.  Yet in reality, of course, everything is a lot more complicated.
 In essence, the energy converter consists of several .simultaneously
 operating devices. Its principal elements are a closed superconductor
 and a control system. This is for terrestrial needs. But the electron
 accelerator connected into the circuit turns the converter into a
 space propulsor. Using it, one can reach the Alpha-Centaurus and
 return back to earth in 12 years.
 33.   "Have you been able to replicate these processes at least
 experimentally? "
 34.   "Yes. Otherwise I wouldn't be telling you anything. In our
 estimates, the energy concealed in 1 kilogram of iron is quite
 sufficient for an interstellar 3ourney."
 3S.  Well, the outlook is, shall we say it, quite fantastic.-Even
 without flying to other worlds. After all, the energy converters will
 be quite suitable for earthly needs. It's about time to start
 dreaming not only about miracle generators capable of replacing
 nigTitmarish nuclear and--foss~'t-f-ue~power piant-s,--tint-a~s~-~bo~t new---------- ---
 means of conveyance. AlI our lives could be changed dramatically...
 UNCLASSIFIED

