 C00121485'      ,
 CLK               .%..
 INFORMATION REPORT
 COUNTRY . At Bea - North Atlantic
 PLACE
 ACQUIRED  - - -
 DATE
 ACQUIRED BY SOURCE
 DATE OF-INFORMATION
 CD NO.
 DATE DISTR.    /f, Aug 1450
 NO OF PACES    2
 NO. OF ENCLS.
 ,Untto mown
 SUPPLEMENT TO
 REPORT NO.
 North, 720 244' Nest.
 Baste
 1.  On 4 Aug 50 at 10 am my ship, while on a heading of 2t5? true, with a smooth sea and
 clear weather, visibility 14 miles, barometer reading 30.03, was unicrvay from Walton,
 flows Scotia, to an East Coast US port.  I was in the chart room just an the bridge
 when Third Mate, who was at mid-bridge checking the eccpass, shouted that there was a
 flying object off the starboard bow.  I immediately ascended the  onning tower and by
 this time the object was on our starboard beam.  It was traveling on a reciprocal
 course to ours about 50 or 100 feet above the water at an--estinated speed.of__over-----~'------- - - --
 25 mph.  From the conning tower I observed it with my binoculars for a period oY
 approximately a minute and a half when it disappeared into the horizon in a north-
 easterly direction.                                               I would estimate that the closest it approached my ship was one
 thousand feet and it was an ovular, cylindrical shaped object the like of which I have
 never seen before.  The object was quite small and I would judge that its diameter
 was approximately 10 feet.  It had depth but?to what extent I was unable to observe.
 The object made no noisq,and as it passed abeam ..ur ship, it appeared to pick up
 considerable speed.  It was not flying smoothly but impressed we as having a churning
 or a rotary motion.   Z had a shiny aluminum color and sparkled in the sunlight.
 Chief YAt
 2.   I was on the main deck, port aide, bust forward of the bride- when the Third Mate
 shouted there was an object on our starboard bow.  I looked off to the starboard and
 sav an object of elliptic shape looking like half an egg cut lenCthviee traveling at
 a great rate of speed on a course reciprocal to our own.  I inoediatcly ran to the
 stern, port side, and with my glasses was able to observe the object disappearing into
 the horizon.  From the time I was first alerted to Its presence until it disappeared
 from sight, 15 seconds elapsed.  I believe that it was traveling at a tremendous rate
 of speed, possibly faster than 500 mph.  During the time I saw it?it was approximately
 70 feet off the water and I Judge it was approxinatrly 10 n!1'a avny.  I clearly saw
 its shadow on the water.  I last oteerved it of, the start'oerl gt:nr to and it scud
 to be inereasin; its speed and aaccr.dinr.  It hal on cllipt!^ she,- a:] I could clear-
 ly see that it had thre? dimensions.  It nobbled In the air, r."e no noise, and was
 a metallic white in color.  The length was approximately six tin's the breadth and its
 belly had a depth of possibly 5'.
 Approved f r Release
 ~
 .0
 4 /
 C00121485-
 .2.
 OO.a,19*4
 Third Mate,
 3.  At 10:00 am on 4 Aug 50 as I was checkinC the cnnpass at aid-bride through a bridge
 port bola I observed a flyin0 object off the starboard bow.  I Immediately shouted
 to the Wpzair;, who was in the char: roaq and the Chief )htq who was below on the
 port deck, of my observation  and vent out on the flyinG bridge spself.  The object
 was approximately 70' above the horizon at a distance of 12 miles.  It came toward
 us, then ran on a course reciprocal to ours and turned off into the horizon in the
 northeast.  I clearly say its shadow on the eater.  Hy impression of the object was
 that it was ellipticals ' set      unlike a Japanese diamond box kite in shape.  I
 have no idea of its size but the length was about six time the breadth and it had
 a depth of from two to five feet.  It made no noise and was traveling at a tremendous
 rate of speed.  Aa it traveled through the airy it made a spinning or wobbly motion.
 After it disappeared in the horizon, I env it reappear several ecconds later, as-
 cending at an even faster speed then when I first observed it.  I have no idea what
 this object was, k never saw onythinC comparable to it before, and it was one of the
 most frightening experiences I have ever had.  I roughly estimate that the object
 traveled 28 miles during the 15 seconds I had it under observation.
 2olleeter+0 !ate,  Tile- Cliief and Third ?Sates were interviewed on 8 August by two
 telliawWarOfflosra.  The Captain who was absent at that time, was interviewed
 on 9 August by only one of the two Intelligence Officers.  In describing the
 ooaarrence, the Chief and Third Mates reenacted their behaviour at the time of
 sighting, and the period from the time the Chief Hate saw the object abeam until he
 reached the after deck and saw it disappear off the starboard quarter was timed at
 15 seconds.  In laying the'angles of observation out an a chart and assuming the
 object was ten miles distant and taking the-ttns into account, it is evident it was
 certainly traveling at a very high rate of speed, which approximated 400 to 500 miles
 per hour.  It'wd2l be noted that there is a tremendous discrepancy between the
 Captain's estimatw of the speed and the estimate of the two officers which could-aot---
 be explained as they were very careful in making their statements and asserted that
 their observations had been correct.  All three men were quite evidently very much
 upset by the sighting.  Aside from the discrepancies,-it was -quite evident to the
 Intelligence Officers who interviewed these men that they bad certainly seen some
 very unusual object which they could not Identify but was  net as certainly not any

