 000015472
 SUBJECT
 ? HOW
 WHERE
 DATE  .
 LANGUAGE
 DATE DIST. X20 Aug 1953
 NO. OF PAGES 2
 SUPPLEMENT TO
 REPORT NO.
 'PHIS IS UNE/ALUMT:D INFORMATION
 ?           CENTRAL %ft ?:  ' 3R                 'C"Y         ?EPOR r r J. 00 ?w-27521
 INFORMATION FROM
 FOREIGN DOCUMENTS OR RADIO BROADCASTS CO NO,
 --
 Denmark, Norway, Finland, USSR                                                       DATE OF
 Military - Air, unconventional aircraft
 ].NIBS DEFENSE LEADERS TAKE SERIOUS VIEW OF FLYING SAUCERS
 13 Juli 1953. The leading Copenhagen dailies, Berl iagake Tidende,
 Social-Demokraten, Politiken, and Information, during the period
 f5omment:? The information below is the full text of an article
 Copenhagen, 12 July -- Danish defense authorities take a serious view of
 the problem of flying saucers. The military experts are of the opinion that
 although most of the observations Lof flying saucers] have turned out to be
 astronomical phenomena, there remain the reports of trained observers which,
 among other things, would seem to indicate that the saucers are dispatched from
 The Danish Air Force Command has recently turned over to the Defense Staff
 a report on various phenomena in the air over Denmark and the eaters  adjacent
 to Denmark.  The report is based on observations from Danish Air Force radar
 stations.  These observations are compared with information regarding the remote-
 controlled projectiles which have been traced in the atmosphere over the north-
 ernmost part of Norway and Finland.  On the basis of these observations, the
 members of the Defense Intelligence Service have come to the conclusion that
 the projectiles could have been dispatched from a Soviet base on Boveya Zemlya
 The report discusses the incident in which an officer and seven privates
 from Earup Airfield on  Jutland, on 12 November 1952, sighted an object in the
 air which resembled an aircraft, but which moved rare         than    %--own
 type of aircraft.  The 4anis1V observations are compared with a number of
 Norwegian observations, among them one which occurred in October 1952 when,
 according to the Norwegian Defense Staff and the Norwegian Navy, an aircraft
 of hitherto unknown design flew over the naval base at Borten at the entrance
 to Oslofjord.  Another incident which is pointed out occurred on a maneuver
 Swedish
 000015472
 recently in northern xorvay, when the crev of an anti-aircraft battery out-
 side of Body observed a mysterious object at a great height.  A jet plane
 van sent up,but it was not able to reach the object, vhicb disappeared at a
 terrific'speed.
 The retort of the Danish Air Force Command emphasizes that the 'flying
 saucer traffic" over Scandinavia sewn to be a fact of great aeroteebnical
 interest.

