 C00183852
 CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY
 The Honorable
 The Secretary of Defense
 Department of Defense
 Washington 25, D. C.
 Dear Mr. Secretary:.
 13 March 1953
 The Director of Central Intelligence has asked that -you.be
 furnished a copy of the attached report prepared by a panel of
 scientists on, the subject of "Unidentified Flying Objects." 'This
 panel was convened at the direction of General Smith, following the
 recommendation of the Intelligence Advisory Committee.
 The conclusions and recommendations say be of interest to you,
 in that they point out certain potential dangers to national security
 which are related to the subject and suggest ways of their elimination.
 e
 J
 pies o$, this report are also being sent to the                    P
 and tc(!,"the'Chairman, National Security Resources Board.
 -
 ?-
 F- O
 Sincerely yours,
 t5
 r+-
 RICHARD D. DRAIN
 CD
 Secretary
 or"
 Intelligence Advisory Committee
 Although this Agency-does not -conei    prob-lems--ar si   from   --  -
 sightings of "flying saucers" primarily its concern, we shall be
 pleased to assist in any appropriate action that you may deem ad-
 visable.
 Approved for Release
 1             n
 This material contains inferm.:tion
 affecting the national defense of
 the United Slates with the meaning
 of the espionage laws, Title 18, USC,
 Sees. 793 and 794, and transmission ?
 or roneiation of which in any manner to.
 an anaathortled person is prohibited by
 law.
 SecDef Cont.. No.-L-+!`  t/
 C00183852.
 REPOT Of THE SCZL'NPIF. 'IC P.AUoL
 ON
 UNIDENTIFIED FLYING OBJECTS
 JAN 171953
 1.   Pursuant to the request of the Assistant Director for Scientific
 Intelligence, the undersigned Panel of Scientific Consultants` has met to
 evaluate any possible threat to national security posed by. Unidentified
 Flying Objects ("Flying Saucers"), and to make recommendations thereon.
 The Panel has received the evidence as presented by cogni2ant intelli-
 gence .agencies,.primarily the Air Technical Intelligence Center, and has
 reviewed4aselection of the. best documented incidents.
 2.   As a result of it  considerations, the Panel concludes,,
 a.   That the evidence presented on Unidentified Flying
 Objects shows no indication that these phenomena constitute
 a direct physical threat to national. security.
 We firmly believe that there is no residuum of cases which indicates
 phenomena which are attributable to foreign artifacts capable of hostile
 acts, and ,teat there is no. evidence that the phenomena indicate a need
 for .the revision of current scientific. concepts.
 The Panel further, concludes :
 a.   That the continued emphasis on the reporting of
 these phenomena does, in these parlous times, result in a
 threat to the orderly functioning of the protective organs
 of the body politic.
 We cite asexanmles the clogging of channels of communication by irrelevant
 reports, the danger of being led by continued false alarms to ignore real
 3
 SeODef Conii 17o.-
 C00183852..
 indications of hostile action, and the cultivation of a morbid national
 psychology in which skillful hostile propaganda could induce hysterical
 behavior and harmful distrust of duly constituted authority.
 4.   In order most effectively to strengthen the national facilities
 for the timely recognition and the appropriate handling of true indications
 .of hostile action, and to minimize the concomitant dangers alluded to
 abcrre, the. Panel recommends:
 a.   That the national security agencies take immediate steps
 to strip the Unidentified Flying Objects of the special status they
 have been given and the aura of mystery they have unfortunateltlv
 acquired;
 b:   That the national security agencies institute policies
 on intelligence, training, and public' education designed to prepare
 the material defenses. end the morale of the country to recognize
 most promptly and to react most effectively to true indications
 of hostile intent or action.
 We suggest that these aims may be achieved by an integrated program
 designed to reassure the public of the total lack of.evidence of inimical
 farces behind the phenemena,'to train personnel to recognize and reject
 false indications quickly'end effectively, and to strengthen regular
 channels for the evaluation of and prompt reaction to true indications
 of hostile measures.
 /    Lloyd V. Berkner
 Associated Universities, Inc.
 !e/  H. P.'Robertson          , Chairman
 'California Institute. of Technology . Ls/ S. A. Goudsmit
 W. Alvarez
 University of California
 Brootutaven madonna. Lanoratoriea
 La     lMxorntp  Pam
 Johns Hopkins University
 -2-
 C00183852...,
 ScI r] FIC ADVISORY PANEL ON
 UNIDENTIFIED FL!IIG OBJFDTS
 24 - 17 January 1953
 , NIDa~CE. PROS   II?
 1,  Seventy-five case. histories of sighhirige 1951 - 1952  (selected by
 ATIC as those best documented).          .
 2.  ATIC Status and*Progress Reports of'Project GRD%E and Project
 3.
 6.  Oatline of Investigation of U.F.O.oa Proposed by Xirtlend?Air'Force
 Baas  (Pro jest .POUNCE): '
 .7.  Motion Picture Films o?'? sightings at T  tonton, Utah 2: July 1952 ,
 and Great Falls, Montana, August 1950.
 BLUE BOOK  (code nemee for ATV-otidy of subject)..
 Progress Reports'. of Project ST(   (code name for Battelle Memorial
 institute. contract work supporting ATIC).
 Summer9 Report: of, Sightings ,at HoUoman Air Force Base, New. Meodeoo
 Report of USAF Reeeerch..Ceiiter,'. Cembaridge, .Mass., 12 eatigetion of
 MGreen Fireball.", Phenomene<  (project. Tw3M=)
 Summary Report of 69 selected_cases..of'sightings of. various
 categories  (Formations, Blinking lights. Hov+ering,'eto.).
 9:      Draft of nanuals  'How to Make a - FI  N PTw p prepared, at ATIC.
 ].O. -Chart Shoring Plot of Geographic Location of Unexplained Sightings
 in the United States during 1952.
 Sunlight Shang High Reflectivity.
 11.     Chart Showing Balloon-TAtnehing Sites in?the United States.'
 22.     Charts Showing Selected Actual Balloon Flight Paths and Relation
 to Reported Sightings.
 13.. Charts Showing Frequency of Reports of.Sightings, 194  - 1952.
 14.     Charts Showing Categories'of i planatione of Sightings.
 15.     Kodachrome Transparencies of Polyethylene Film Balloons in Bright
 TAB  B
 16.  Motion picture.of sesgullo in bright sunlight showing high. reflectivity..
 17.  Inte11ig ence, Reports?ReiatUg to U.S.S.Ro Interest in U. S. Sightings.
 18.  Samples of Official USAF Reporting Forma and Copies of Pertinent
 Air Force, Army and rtavy Orders Relating to Subject.
 19.  Semple Pol70thy1ene "Pillow" Balloon  (54 inches square) .
 20.. aVeriations in Rader Coverage". JAVP 101?(Maimal illustrating unusuai
 operating characterristion of Service radar)
 21.  Miscellaneous official letters end foreign iatel igex a reports
 gosling with subject.
 22.  Copies of popular published works dealing with subject  (articles
 in periodicals, newspaper clippings ax d books) .
 C00183852
 SC3'ENTIFIC ADVISORY PA1 L ON
 uNID=IFIED FLYT.3G OBJFETS
 14 -.17 Jairjr 1953
 ?OFiGANIZATION
 Dr.. )I. P. Robertet (Chairiazu  California Institute
 Dr. L.tvyd V. Berl
 ' Dr, I+nia. W. Alvarq
 .. Samiaat. Goudsaait
 of Technology
 University of
 California.'
 Associated Un4v
 cities, Ingo
 Brookhaven National
 Iaburatories
 .
 Dr. J: 'Alien lk
 !k'0. l  ierick C, Durant
 Ohio State Uniberr
 city
 Arthur P. Little,
 Inc
 . Garland.
 Varstial l ? Chedwell
 Mr?? Ralph L.. Clark
 timmanding General,
 .A.1I~C?:          .
 Asa'.stant Director,
 aril, CIA
 Deputy .@anietant
 Direro9y, 0/SI, CIA
 Flk= OF CONFETII"-
 Phyaics, ?,rcapons
 .. Physics, tadar
 Geophysics
 Atomic staMMU= ,
 statistical.
 problem
 Aatronoz*q. Astr.o-
 . ph3isias . ?    ,
 .   AstronouV
 .Rockets, guided
 .missiles
 Scientific and
 technical Intelli-
 gence
 Scientific and
 technical intelli-
 gee
 Scientific and . .
 technical intelli.
 C00183852
 Philip G, 8b-ong
 3fr; Stephen T, Fob
 Capt: Mord J. Ruppelto USAP
 lam, Jo Dwoy 2roornoto Tr.
 Lt. R... S.' Reams USO
 Mr- 30 -27 Tea.
 TAB
 nmp.,,-O' .P-       LL
 ChiefD, Operations      Scie_it22Lc and
 StaftD O/SI8 CIA        tochni6al itte       ?
 Acting Chiefs Speolul   Salentine and
 study orvnpa D/I        tectmleel JVLOnj
 4JS P                   game
 Chi fo Aerial. Phi Seientifia and
 P~rar~h a ATI1C a   p   teehntcal lute
 genes
 7A0 E?. hyl Cc poatton
 USN Phoo.e Inter  2a.
 tion Iebo  +AW70.
 Antooatin
 iiSg Pboto Intarpae't.-
 tion Ieboratwy,
 AneemstU
 Aero Big.
 Ph,ou inettat m
 Photo i.ntc aretation
 AIN10

