 -000175721
 Page: 12    of 28
 Concatenated JPRS Reports, 1992
 Document 4 of 12                                           Page
 Classification:   UNCLASSIFIED       Status:        [STAT]
 Document Date:    24 Feb 92          Category:      [CAT]
 Report Type:      JPRS report        Report Date:
 Report Number:    JPRS-UMA-92-009    UDC Number:
 Author(s):  IZVESTIYA Correspondence Marat Zubko, Stockholm:
 "Uninvited Guests in the Swedish Fjords"]
 Headline:  Swedish Report on Soviet Submarine Violations Noted
 Source Line:  92UM0650B Moscow IVZESTIYA in Russian 24 Feb 92 Morning
 Edition p 5
 Subslug:  [Article by IZVESTIYA Correspondence Karat Zubko,
 Stockholm: "Uninvited Guests in the Swedish Fjords"]
 FULL TEXT OF ARTICLE:
 1.  [Article by IZVESTIYA Correspondence Marat Zubko, Stockholm:
 "Uninvited Guests in the Swedish Fjords"]
 2.  [Text] Foreign submarines continued to penetrate Sweden's
 territorial waters in 1991, but evidently these intrusions ceased in
 September-that conclusion is contained in a report which Swedish
 Armed Forces Commander-in-Chief General Bengt Gustafsson submitted to
 the country's government.
 3.  The commander-in-chief compiles annual reports about violations
 of Sweden's airspace and territorial waters and their appearance is
 regarded with restraint here. But, this time, the Swedes impatiently
 awaited Bengt Gustafsson's reports on the causes for them. Not long
 ago, Commander Carl Andersson, famous for his active participation in
 the hunt for submarines, literally dumbfounded his countrymen with
 his declaration that all the commotion about submarine incursions is
 simply a chimera, like the story of flying saucers (IZVESTIYA, No.
 230).
 4.  How did the general confirm his story? He confirms that the
 country's coast guard recorded "approximately five probable
 violations" off Sweden's eastern coast to the north and south of
 Stockholm. In his words, there was an additional pair of incursions,
 but with a lesser degree of probability.
 5.  As we can see, this is a question of probable incursions, but
 nevertheless, the commander-in-chief says he was 100 percent
 convinced that foreign submarines have entered the country's
 territorial waters.
 6.  The report notes that Swedish seamen twice managed to record
 326
 Approved or Release
 UNCLASSIFIED 9-  9-010
 C00175721
 Page: 13    of 28
 Concatenated JPRS Reports, 1992
 Document 4 of 12                                                Page   2
 "submarine noises" which, according to military experts, were
 identical to those recorded for the first time during the violation
 of Sweden's sea boundaries on the west coast in 1984, and then
 "caught" 40 more times.
 7.  By the nature of the noises, the Swedes sort of established that
 they are dealing with a mini-submarine 25-35 meters long.
 8.  However, the primary evidence that incursions are taking place in
 principle, in the words of ministry of defense representatives, is
 contained in the video-film "Uninvited Guests," which is attached
 to the report.  Specifically, this film contains frames that were
 taken at the bottom of one of the bays of'Sweden's Gotland Island, in
 which damage to the underwater anti-submarine warning cable is
 visible. The film states that an underwater all-terrain vehicle
 deployed from aboard a submarine might have damaged the signal
 system.
 9.  And still even this did not appear to be adequately convincing to
 many Swedes. A number of experts expressed the opinion that ships'
 anchors or bottom trawl nets could have damaged the cable.
 10.  However, there is a detail in the commander-in-chief's report
 that calls special attention to itself: violations of Swedish waters
 ceased in September 1991. And although Bengt Gusta sson says t at  t
 is still early to come to a conclusion on the subject of the
 cessation of the incursions, there is still something to ponder here.
 11.  First of all, this question arises: isn't the disappearance of
 periscopes from Swedish waters not associated with the replacement of
 the former USSR's Ministry of Defense leadership after the August
 putsch? If it is associated, doesn't it signify that our submarines
 were nevertheless violating Swedish territorial waters? The sooner
 the answer is given on that score, the better.
 12.  However, that does not completely rule out that this is only a
 temporary break in the "periscope hunt" in Sweden and that entirely
 different forces are related to the incursions. In this regard,
 attention is directed to a recent article by Investigator Tommi
 Lindfors in the Stockholm newspaper DAGENS NYUKHETER which told a
 story that was unknown to the Swedish public. In February 1984, a
 foreign submarine which appeared to be... American was detected in
 the coastal waters of southern Sweden, near Karlskrona Naval Base.
 13.  Having fired 22 depth-charges at the submarine, the coast guard
 attempted to detain it, but it did not manage to catch or destroy it.
 Why? Maybe because on that very same day the American ABC television
 company reported that U.S. Navy mini-submarines "are visiting the
 `CO0175721
 Page: 14    of 28
 Concatenated JPRS Reports, 1992
 Document 4 of 12                                                  Page   3
 waters of friendly states" for the purpose of studying underwater
 objects. It is easy to understand that the Swedes were given the
 signal not to bomb too zealously.  At that time, IZVESTIYA wrote
 about CBS's acknowledgement.
 14.  In December 1991, General Gustafsson ordered the coast guard to
 act more energetically in the event of territorial water violations,
 specifically, to immediately open fire if sonar detects the presence
 of unidentified mini-submarines about 30 meters long. Now, we assume
 that measures will be even more severe. While commenting on the
 commander-in-chief's report, Defense Minister Anders Bjork stated:
 15.  "We will never reconcile ourselves to that fact that.some state
 is violating Swedish waters. Neither now, nor in the future..."

