 000015273..
 2.   no vasttei                                       NOWWho, was seeeomlt?
 cal on the subject a U70 s.      st en&tst who sawed as translator,
 a radio astronomer, emphatically vtated that he know of a sightinta
 of UT0's to the USSR and added with a iausb that it they veto eoly sees
 is the M. they must is at Sottet origin.
 3.   At the                                            *roof the sutronosers mentioned
 that she bad boas  of some sightiags of unidentified objects sear the
 Caucasus.  She was unaware of any study being ands of them but was spen-
 minded 0. the subject.
 acted in the psoblles.  M bad read via- a    soak (ul+ieh has been trans-
 lated into Russia) but did not accept his eoacluatsas. -knee
 of seat st;htlagr to the northern part of the USSR. but said that re-
 ports of Such ?tthttngs are not printed io Soviet newspapers because
 they are not regarded as seteotilLe observations.   Cecn.nti  this is
 interesting to view of the readiness of Soviet oewpapers to prtrt to.
 they fsntastte reports of hypotheses Pad observations" suggested by the
 sore tciginsttve oeabers of the scientific co   ratty.  Apparently sea
 3. tt the                                   , hurls t.terast is .beer. u
 the Ur0 queer s.                  sno  that be and soeeral stbar aa?
 tresoders bed bass art  a t e saaeteretdo ass stoats; aid had aw a
 crrtous. reddish object flashier thtosgh the air Chet thW wars aaavtssed
 was sattber a sitelltte set a oteortta. iwaevet, theft tardtate ts?
 terpretettos vac that this object Sight bi-s b.ee a fragsaat of a Betel.
 lit* at teahet retrraiad ft.. Orbit, biratas up is the sties
 theuht that h1fO's had been can is the VSR but he oseld got  o sfeettls
 as to locattoes and characteristics.
 d.  At the                                           gals little interest
 was .bawn.  Oil e     e aatieassir.,                  'pee with the group War-
 tiered bylexpluad cpafttbad the eb..r t oa of a Peevtter object.  Re
 did not discuss the experience, to de ail but clearly bad bas scrock br
 the possi-tltcy that the objset ai>th. Nave been s 'oeacot.?
 7,  at the                                   t .re vas considerable interest.
 The institute thaiu es                                   prwidad ever b7
 Rawaeer, the tat lei diseue  a o  the preblea was with
 raatar of the tsatitua,                bats ton tied Lead $.nt l'a
 boot, bat eoaidersd it an adequate        setsent of the subject which be
 consequently felt was closed.  So indicated that no ohaervatlegm of 17060
 bad boas made by his staff said that they hid received so report. of sutb
 observations.             Bsuever. Mrs the             reaseded to indicate the
 results of McEs.ald'. aritissl at    ?      peoblon.~eeedhly can.
 eedsd that thou misbt to dare to it mad caseluded by stating that It
 was "clearly still as opo quevttaa.?
 V.  Another eatrooawr rc?'need that to the ssrtbera Part of.T.assUrta.
 there had bass reptetcd riIbtt'Is of bell iisbtntns.
 JMMMP%Od eswe r t.:ro  .mt to taveetasate end dissevers    at west sw.;~~
 Ciao assn were safi.":oss of entasobtle badlt htc fteas an isvstatea
 layer.
 1.  Later. a discussion was halt with            Rs we not very Impressed
 with Hese.l's book, but was also sot    rae.ed with the significoee of
 the phesoseam.  It is poastbla that sere interest vas hdadlwd tb:t Might
 lead to addittesel liveltigettose.
 vas   as  i..atisftod with Basal'. boot and colt that
 there was definitely as oppr-atity for additiehal research.
 It.  The general tooling ans gets is that so official treatment of the ltfD
 problem has been given to the h1SSt.  lsatsad people refer to the is
 vary, prisaipait hisssel's book. to desonetrate the sbaonos et teal
 scientific proble..a.  Si the cos time, tbera it es shiest uatveraal
 awareness of the history and ehatectertstta of the pbe"motaw efts as.
 socteted with esnsiderable isterist.  The result is that a aawiostraties
 of the inadequacy of hhi Offietsl explanations coupled with assn proof of
 tt.. re.l1ty of the abearvattens might excite emthtuiasa saes raptly
 aaont Soviet astr+soners tun sent their IS eousterparts vhs are sera
 .troagly influenced by the official ridicule associated with WO'e is

