 )
 1.  At 1100 yesterday morning I met with Dr. Julius A. Stratton,
 Executive Vice President and Provost of Massachusstts?Institute of
 Technolor and Dr. Max Millikan, Director of CENIS.  I briefed them
 on the various ne* reports of sightings including the Limestone Base
 Case, the Florida'Scout Xaster, the Utah Notion Pictures, etc.  I also
 brought Dr. Stratton up to date on developments which had occurred
 since our previous discussion of the subject in August. Dr. Stratton
 reiterated his earlier position that this is a subject which must be
 investigated and he said that probably the best means of getting a
 thoroughly competent review of the problem would be through Project
 LINCOLU.  He said, however, that in vidw of the delicate position in
 relation to Ki Force, as a result of the "Summer Study Report", any
 acceptance of this prnjcetety LL\COLN must be based on Air Force con-
 currence or on an independent - proposal-from one of "t2io outer" services.
 H:r said that Alfred.Hill would be the best man to head the group.
 Ass?.iig that it might prove impractical to place the Project at
 LINCOLN, we explored other possibilities including Princeton and Cal
 Tech.  Dr. Stratton felt very strongly that Cal Tech would be the
 better of the two in view of the presenca.*nere of Robertson, Lauritson,
 !'Spitzer _ on te. orary du*,v from Princeton), Yil.likan is brother and
 others. Dr. Stratton asked particularly that we keep bin informed
 he is psrscnly very interested as well as fully aware of the potential
 1? r    danger =d i--p?ications of the situation..
 2.  Following the meeting with Drs. Stratton and Millikan, I
 l       had lunch at   it Faculty Club with Lloyd Derkner and Jerrold Zacharias
 ~?'?    and briefed them on the recent cases and our feelings regarding their
 implications.  Bertater, while apparently not interested in taking a
 personal part, felt strongly that the saucer problem should be
 thoralghl;, investigated from a scientifin point of view.  Zacharias
 did not wear to be greatly interested in the problem and made only
 one suggestion, i.e. that shiriey 0uisby of Columbia University be
 brought into the picture. Quimby took his physics degree at the same
 time as Zacharias; is now at Colunbia University, having during the
 war been a navy scientist working on ASH.  Zacharias suggested Quimby
 because the latter is probably the most expert man in the country
 on magic and general chicanery.
 3. My conclusion from these conversations is that it will probably
 be necessary to secure the full backing of DCI in order that a scien-
 tific review of this problem may be laid on. Without this backing, it
 would probably be inpossible to secure the Air Force cooperation which
 would be necessary, particularly in the math of availability of
 4

