 C00015283
 T1Go 2,~TERY ~' 'fl  "e'LYltlG DXOCON
 A eontributi+m to its possible eaplamtiaa.
 kly Dr. MW A X* wit, ttsatia5o Chile*
 h. Oristobal Golan 19916
 Cauriw. I=ty use A=XT              so ilikR7LG.1'
 Attachment 1
 Though the ooatinnousls reappearing reports on the appearance of nsv1
 arybterious aircraft of unknown eonetrcetion doaald be ea nol4erod with severe
 aakopticiaaaa as the result of a sort of ne      sin, nevertheless sumo of the
 detailed and coinciding accounts of to           trained observers deserve atten-
 tion and pornit ane to draw conaluxi   as to the probable olasoiticatlon of
 than rev aircraft.
 Slow so far the observations love been r'de malnlyr in the daarl:, which
 means that only the luminous parts of the craft ark, visible, every ropart baths
 the description of shining discs or circles.  It    should discard the absurd
 conjecture that these aircraft originate free lt;?oa~6 We earth, than it is easy
 to arrive at the conclusion that the ebielag alvelea boar a relation to theva-
 haust of a rotary gas-turbine. The possibility `fists that the rotor of a tur-
 bine Is used at the acme tiu as a stabilising top and is therefore fixed
 vertically to the dsvel of the other turbine rings, which in the darkness prmo-
 duees the effect of the "rule of Saturn".
 '  e observations renind is of a caauiLteZy new typo of aircraft which we
 devcy:;;.cd during the years I worked in the research plant of Profeasor Junhars
 in Dessau, which was attached to the airplane faotoriea brown all over the world.
 I do not know hoar reap of ray co-uorkars are still alive today.* but I do know that
 Dr. Book, Prwfessar at the Technical US* School of Berlin, and who was at that
 time   chief and Aland of rent' 7-max-s has been departed to the Soviet Melon.
 The name of Professor Dock was never widely know due to his modest oharaoter,
 but be my !mine boss the greatest @enins of German airplane theoretics, and later,
 in view of his extraordinary fhoalties, he was rmend bead constructor of the Ilnietry
 of Ger::`an Airwiyrs and Director of the German Institute of Airways Research in
 Berlin-Adlsrshof.
 In order to explain to a wider alrcl, or readers the basic idea of the new air-
 craft,.I should kilos to submit           llovind explaaatioaasa
 The first   and mtknma      who considered the rev Science of Aero-
 dynamics after    oemaesaosasnt of pelf experimental developments of aircraft
 construction was the Russian Professor `oadd or ktosoou. Delbre the first vrld
 war and together with?aay esteemed teacher, Be. k4rtta from the Technical R19ta School
 of .Stuttgart, Geraaany- be devek. d the theory or adrplsne-vtngbsse..     eaor
 lfutta succeeded in establishing .be famous "Aiffirantial equation of the undo
 trat;   vbieh far the first time thrown which La any case explains fbr' the first tins an the lavosseas in theoretically the     m ~    Ls why a
 AooO'v 1d~ and
 planeving can bear a load while moving forward throe  the air. Since then the
 "3utta-Jubovald Theory of AirpLw-vingbesm" has been the ibmdation of AU aura-
 dynamics. An already mentioned, the can of this work is the so-called "boundary
 , which consists of the thin layer of air in U" the transition of
 Velocity Zero to the Velocity of the Ibving Object talon place. If the object is
 strsaali ed then the boundary stratum will endeavor not to sever, no whirlwinds will
 occur, and therefore no loss of energy will two piece in that stratum. Sian
 nature always functions meet economically, it always tries to avid lose of energy,
 and therefore a piansviag would rather boar weight then cause a disruption of the
 comae of the current and let the wing drop.
 The logical conoluaions based an these theoretic discoveries were obvi u as
 already in the year 1925 Professor 5. O. Daman, also ham the Technical High School
 of Stuttgart; received a patent an the "8plttviog" throsgh which the artificial
 interruption of4ths'eowrse of the current, the tearing or the bo%mdary etratua and
 the consequent braking and dumisiehing or the landing speed would be attained. This
 C3 iM   ~  ttt9k:S.
 ~                                                          `tea
 C00015283
 Cgiffl L nMZL =PO& ACCIdi=               Co $414
 Attaetswont 1
 procedure was Rater appisd to a great extent to the fighter plane Motor Ju. 8C
 under the none of "dive4waks". This patent had to '* handed to the i4g1116
 factory Handley-Pap after World War t, which .nplains that the onus of %"207-
 Foam Splitting" is more widely known.
 However, devslope'ants +oroceedod. It was principally the Asrodynariie Ex-
 perlmontal Instituts of the Gottingen University, dirsoted bF the rsaomsd
 Professors Praadtl and Bets, and Constructor Flottsor, which draw its conclusions
 from the theory of tbhe airplane-uio~bem. Flettnsr proved that the conditions
 of a rotating object are stigma to those wbieh appear is a etransktoriseb n'
 covoment. Thus evolved the "Plattner-Rotor".
 Professor Jwunkers, bead of the  U (mown mirplaw works in Dessau, who in
 the year 1915 received his patbbaea ng patent on the one-plea metal wing vitbout
 junctures, ordered a research VoWs which was hadded by Prat'sesor Dr. Book, and
 to which I had the honor to Won& to iatvestigats to *At extent the VOUSt of a
 wing could be increased through the attachment of a Thttesr-Rotor is to shape of
 a cylinder turning at great speed.  The cylinder was two-thirds of the laugth of
 t'ne vice and was installed in the noes o!' the wing, when it, could best be adapted
 to the wing's profile. To assist us with acrodynomio prob]eas, the Gott4iwgsa
 University sent us Professor Prardtl. The experiments turned out to be extrsas]y
 difficult and involved many casualties. The purely technical question of the
 speedy uplift of a Zang cylinder of light construction could not be solved at that
 time.  Inexplicable vibrations and axle breakages occurred ties after time which
 Professor Junkers ordered us to investigate, and with which we were occupied for aunt
 Dot lass than four nee, all experienced and tried pilots of the first 'Wand ;:or and
 outstanding engineers, died in these e      nts. It was clasr to us Out only a
 gea-turbine could produce the direct mplift of the cylinder. Actiwrer, since nean-
 whi]e rare pressing problan awaited solution, experiments with this type of airy
 craft move interruptai
 2hanw&ile the %s        o T  oriental Institute of Ootti gem made new and
 enlightening discovgriec. Professor Data found that supersonic vas, such as
 are produced by quickly rotating propellers, created entirely new conditions.
 This investigation, bousver, needed the furnishing of a wind tames for supersonic
 speeds "stioh could only be built ray years Inter, and which after the war was
 forwarded to the United States where it greatly used all scientists.
 Now light was died on mV things. It was ibwmd that the tearing, of the
 boundary stratum at supersonic speeds involved mach poster resistance, so that
 an object with fall atxrspbsrie pressure practically ebengs? hoe the upper layer
 of air, and theoretically experiences than the same uplift as an object of the
 seas swtrface in the water.  The converting of the revelations found in research
 into reality, however, needed the solution of the starting force through a gas-
 turbine or another equivalent nohine or instrument.
 of beretofam unexpved
 it had often been oboer     that the wimp of q~ft%mlfam amplWastion.  For     Is
 rotatingMsai es (( DnU
 wirkwmg") was much greater than could be explained according to the lava of
 bellistios. Paradoxical explanations wove sought for this awash as that the air
 resistance decreases with graving speeds. Today was dmcw that these quickly rotating
 missiles "swim" in the surrounding layers of air and therefore loss part of their
 weight.  Pall clarification was brought about only with supersonic speeds, which
 were ebtainod in the experiments with rockets (Y-2) bud worn arrived at by flights
 of marry hundreds and thousands of filaosters, and which an only be explained by
 the way in which than aiseiles literally "bang" in the air.  The surprise of the
 specialised scientists the world over at the astounding results of the Osxv n V-2
 was not less than that which is produced today by the appearance of the epstsrlous
 ?F3ying Discs".
 In the sans way in which the ingenious dieoernmeat of Professor Junkers
 pointed the way for airplane aaesstruction for the whole world, thus also t   his
 idea of attachin;, Flettmer Rotors have a revolutionary effect. tirplames of this
 type resat have auah an enormans carrying capacity as to be poetically amp+arab]s
 to axphibiaus planes of the mama sine. The lack of uplift produced by the Plattner
 Rotors can easily be achieved through the oblique position of the entire airplane
 -ter'`     _
 Y~ niM.tt ~ :?5~
 C00015283
 go V94W
 Attubssnt 1
 with a positive d   iAC w CU in ooanaotian with Us oporu ui2y Mph status
 apaod. The attaabig a Madly rotstipg too mans aide stability. Tbars
 is also the possibility of attsohiag borisoatal aiadlIas7 psopULsa of the
 helicopter type. . d what about the question of tin starting fords! .7r aalaty
 of such to airorai`t stands and fail as the satatar:~ttiisn~g iba~os of the aril+derap sod
 only too veli do t romsabsr the oswslti~as iofUot?d b the ltsk of it. As i
 z
 ssinaa tdconssiists only of ro ti  putt and wrW vitk in 6 yinda Ut of a
 stead magus.
 There is only one acre gmetioa to be answered: aauld mob an sl:aralt
 carry snouUh tual for vend-tide 3oisasyr4 We qt stun is asol2.v asar+sred in
 the A firteativs. in %a first plan. mEt an also=aft boa a tsue-sadous  ~w
 capacity, an ve bas ahead; steal and In the stood plans aboososl tusiM Mg
 made astounding deuelo envs in this aspect, us.. km today--quite a     !'rod
 atomic energy--oazriers of ensr& of msuspocted poor and duration.      al onl4 be
 roasabered that the aisallea of Gsrrrsa oath-tank weapons wore mated with cbeaioal
 subatonoda vhioh malted vp to 20 ants.-of steel plates within laaotions of a
 ssoonxl. Znargy curlers of this tips, if appliosbl. to a  a-turbine, should met
 an n 'SO-radive poosibi. vhtoh for surprises that of @asolins en iaos.
 The i'uture dl1 show Whether the; "r'lyiag Discs" are only the pzodmts of
 imagination or Whetter they are the Teeults of a far-advanced Corson aoienoe Which,
 possibly, as well as the nearly finished atomic bombs, my haw Lilian into the
 bands of the Russians.
 %
 Pub
 Y- .?-Aa:1-`N

