 C00175716
 Concatenated JPRS Reports, 1991
 Classification:   UNCLASSIFIED       Status:        [STAT]
 Report Type:      JPRS Report        Report Date:
 Report Number:    JPRS-USP-91-005    UDC Number:
 Page   1
 FULL TEXT OF ARTICLE:
 1.  What's been done so far and what may lie ahead- something of a
 summary of the development of the space program, and an attempt at
 predicting how it will develop-are what is contained in this
 brochure, written by one of the planet's first cosmonauts.
 2.  The brochure is intended for a broad circle of readers.
 3.  Thirty years have gone by since the first man flew into space,
 and 33 years since the launch of the first artificial Earth
 satellite. One naturally wants to ask oneself, Just what have we
 succeeded in doing? What new things have we learned? What have we
 gained that is of practical value?
 5.  In terms of manned flight, we can listhefollowing
 achievements:
 6.  We have found out that man can live and work in orbit for a year
 (and probably longer).
 7.  We have performed six lunar missions.
 8.  Man can work in open space (in a space suit), but his mobility
 and his capabilities there are extremely limited.
 9.  Man can do research in space, altering its programs and aims in
 the course of a mission. His capabilities, however, are largely
 determined by the equipment on board, and he cannot compete with
 automatic devices in terms of accuracy of execution of precision
 operations.
 10.  Manned spaceflight has not given us any fundamentally new
 information (other than data on man himself in weightlessness and
 data on the operation of the flight systems themselves in space), and
 we are powered by the hope for now that we will be able to do
 something of substance in the future.
 11.  We still haven't found an "ecological niche" in science,
 3Z3
 Page: 8     of 86
 UNCLASSIFIED        Approved for Release-
 C00175716
 Page: 9     of 86
 Concatenated JPRS Reports, 1991
 Document 5 of 10                                                 Page   2
 technology, or economics for a man working in orbit (the practical
 work that has been done so far-making observations and turning
 cameras, instruments for observing outer space, and experimental
 equipment on and off- could have been done, theoretically, with
 automatic devices that, for the moment, can compete with man in
 everything but the repair and replacement of individual instruments
 and pieces of equipment; but the slot of "repairman" is hardly a.
 secure, long-lasting niche).
 12.  In terms of applied, in-orbit activity that is beneficial to the
 people on Earth, the use of unmanned spacecraft has produced much
 better results. In that regard, we can name the following important
 achievements:
 13.  a marked expansion of the capabilities of telephone, telex, and
 computer communications through the use of communications satellites
 15.  global weather monitoring with weather satellites, and
 dramatically better accuracy in weather forecasting and in warning of
 approaching natural disasters
 16.  improved maritime and airways navigation through the use of
 satellite-based navigation systems
 17.  greater reliability in the receipt of distress signals and in
 the identification of the area from which a signal is coming as a
 result of the use of satellite systems like Cospas-Sarsat
 18.  the capability of global and local ecological monitoring of land
 areas and sea surfaces and of the study of the Earth's natural
 resources with satellites
 19.  observation of land areas and sea surfaces with reconnaissance
 satellites not only for purposes of military reconnaissance, but also
 for monitoring adherence to international arms-limitation agreements.
 20.  Unmanned spacecraft have been used to obtain important new
 information in the field of scientific research.  Such information
 includes the following:
 21.  discovery of the Earth's radiation belts
 22.  research findings associated with the Earth's ionosphere and
 magnetosphere
 23.  discovery of "solar wind"
 C00175716
 Page: 10    of 86
 Concatenated JPRS Reports, 1991
 Document 5 of 10                                                 Page
 25.  data on the atmospheres and surfaces of Venus and Mars
 (composition, density and pressure variation with altitude, relief)
 26.  large-scale maps and photographs of the surfaces of the Moon,
 Mars, and distant planets of the solar system and their moons
 27.  detection in the celestial sphere and mapping of sources
 emitting in the ultraviolet, X-ray, and gamma ranges of
 electromagnetic radiation
 28.  detection in the celestial sphere of sources of X-ray and gamma
 bursts
 29.  confirmation of the existence of neutron stars and "black
 holes" in the Universe
 30.  discovery of heretofore unknown processes occurring in the
 Universe (matter transfer between close binary star systems,
 accretion of matter on the surface of neutron stars, accretion of
 matter on "black holes").
 31.  In terms of the creation of technical-systems for space
 hardware, we have, of course, achieved great success. But we
 shouldn't flatter ourselves too much: after all, the space hardware
 has been working, so to speak, for itself.
 32.  Here we could note the following important efforts.  First,
 various systems for putting spacecraft into orbit have been created:
 33.  expendable rockets, among which we could name, for example, the
 Soviet rockets of the R7 family (capable of putting a payload of
 about 7 tons into orbit), the Proton family (approx. 20-ton payload),
 Zenit (approx. 13-ton payload), and Energiya (payload on the order of
 100 tons); the American rockets of the Atlas family (with Atlas-Agena
 capable of putting payload of about 3.4 tons into orbit), the Titan
 family (the Titan 3C can put about 12 tons into orbit), and the
 Saturn 5 (capable of lifting 137 tons); and the French rockets of the
 Ariane family (the payload mass of the Ariane 5 is expected to be
 about 20 tons)
 34.  "reusable" transport systems: the American Shuttle system
 (with a payload mass of about 30 tons) and the Soviet Buran system
 (the payload mass is expected to be up to 30 tons).
 35.  Second, systems for manned flight and manned operations in space
 C00175716
 Page: 11    of 86
 Concatenated JPRS Reports, 1991
 Document 5 of 10                                                Page   4
 have been created-manned spacecraft and orbital stations: the
 single-seat Vostok, capable of up to 10 days of flight; the
 single-seat Mercury (up to 24 hours of flight); the three-seat Vostok
 (up to three days of flight); the two-seat Gemini (up to 15 days of
 flight); the three-seat Soyuz (up to 20 days of independent flight
 and six months of flight as past of an orbital station); the two-seat
 lunar mission craft (up to 30 days of independent flight); the
 orbital Skylab stations; the Salyut-series stations; and the
 multimodule Mir station.
 36.  Next, unmanned space vehicles have been created for scientific
 research. The most outstanding results have been produced with the
 Explorer 1 (discovery of the Earth's radiation belts); the Luner
 Orbiter (mapping of the Moon's surface from a satellite orbit);
 Luna-16 (delivery of soil from the lunar surface to Earth); Luna-17
 (the self-propelled vehicle controlled by an Earth-based operator);
 Venera-4 (first data on the parameters of the Venutian atmosphere);
 Mariner 9 (studies and mapping of the surface of Mars from a
 satellite orbit); Viking.1 (studies of the surface of Mars and a
 search for signs of life in the vicinity of the landing site);
 Voyager (studies of the distant planets of the solar system); Uhuru,
 Ariel, SAS-3, Vela, Copernicus, ANS-1, COS-8.  HEAO, and IUE (basic
 astrophysical research in the X-ray and UV ranges).
 37.  And last of all, the unmanned space vehicles for applied
 operations in Earth satellite orbit. Among them one cannot fail to
 include the communications satellites (Intelsat, Comstar, Sincom,
 Ekran, etc.), satellites for studying the Earth's natural resources
 (Landsat, Seasat), navigation satellites (like Navsat), weather
 satellites, reconnaissance satellites, and satellites for relaying
 distress signals and for determining their coordinates.
 38.  The Experience We've Garnered
 39.  The experience we've garnered is quite varied. By and large, it
 relates to the rather well-known tasks associated with the
 development, manufacture, testing, and operation of rocket and space
 hardware.
 40.  For example, problems related to safety surrounding the launch
 of rocket systems. Those problems mainly involve the large quantities
 of oxidizer and propellant that are loaded into the rocket. Toxic
 components, as they are used in such a rocket, make things very
 complicated at the launch site. There is always the danger of a
 breach in the integrity of the fueling system or the rocket itself,
 which would be fraught with catastrophic consequences. When
 components such as nitric acid, nitrogen tetroxide, hydrazine, or
 dimethylhydrazine are used, the danger to the personnel who are
 UNCLASSIFIED
 C00175716
 Page: 12    of 86
 Concatenated JPRS Reports, 1991
 Document 5 of 10                                                Page   5
 servicing the rocket is great, and stringent safety measures must be
 observed.  Even if the rocket and its launch systems are designed so
 that there are no personnel present at the launch pad after fueling
 operations begin and before liftoff and even if all processes that
 involve mating the fueling systems, checking their seals, and the
 fueling itself are automated, there is still always the danger that
 something will go wrong, and specialists will have to go near the
 rocket during the fueling process or after it is completed. Gas
 masks, special protective clothing, and highly sensitive gear for
 monitoring the gas composition of the air are necessary gear for
 personnel at the launch sites for such rockets.
 41.  Even for today's rockets, normal flight involves certain
 complexities. First stages fall back to Earth, which means that drop
 regions that may be dozens of square kilometers in area must be
 removed from public use. The situation with rockets that use toxic
 components is made more complex by the fact that, among other things,
 first stages can break up when they hit the surface, and over time
 the residues of the toxic components can build up in the drop regions
 and make their way into the ground water.
 42.  In a word, rocket systems in the future should be based on the
 use of ecologically clean components such as kerosene/oxygen or
 hydrogen/oxygen.
 43.  Moreover, we need to consider the interaction that takes place
 between the burning of rocket fuel and the atmosphere, particularly
 the ozone layer. Standard liquid-propellant rockets apparently
 present no danger; but in the use of solid-propellant rockets, there
 is the danger that the combustion products will interact with ozone,
 since they can be very effective catalysts of its,decomposition.
 44.  The entirely real danger of an accident during the powered phase
 of flight-and, accordingly, the danger of the rocket fragments
 falling to the Earth along the flight path-imposes strict
 requirements on the choice of launch site and ascent trajectory, so
 that the rocket will not pass over densely populated regions.
 45.  The danger of an accident with catastrophic consequences always
 exists during the flight of a rocket. It stems from the very high
 concentration of energy (hundreds of tons of fuel) in the rocket and
 the power in the rocket engines, from the strain on the structure,
 and from the small number of flights of that particular model of
 rocket (by comparison with, say, automobiles or airplanes). The
 danger presented by rockets is clearly illustrated by the power
 inherent in the rocket engines.  For example, the engines of an R7
 rocket in the first stage have on the order of 10 million horsepower,
 and the engines of the Shuttle rocket system, on the order of 70
 C00175716
 Page: 13    of 86
 Concatenated JPRS Reports, 1991
 Document 5 of 10                                                Page   6
 million horsepower. The danger is always clear in the mind of the
 developers. Even the first American spacecraft-Hercury, Gemini, and
 Apollo-had good rescue systems that effected the separation and swift
 removal of the spacecraft from a launch vehicle breaking up as a
 result of a failure. A fairly good emergency system for rescuing the
 cosmonauts during a launch-vehicle failure was created for the Soyuz
 craft. Twice it saved the lives of cosmonauts-once during a '
 third-stage failure, and once during an emergency at the launch pad.
 46.  Design difficulties do not justify the absence of a full-fledged
 rescue system in the event of launch-vehicle failure. Such a system
 is conspicuously absent in the Shuttle system and represents its
 chief shortcoming.
 47.  After the separation of the spacecraft or unmanned space vehicle
 from the launch vehicle, the upper stage usually remains in orbit,
 gradually slowing and then entering the dense layers of the
 atmosphere, where it burns up for the most part, and its fragments
 fall to Earth. If the altitude of the injection orbit is low (less
 than 200 km, for example), that process takes several days. But if
 the altitude is high, the upper stage may remain in orbit months or
 years.
 48.  It must be said that that eventually becomes a problem.  At this
 moment, the quantity of upper stages that remain in nea -EartTi
 orbit-along with space vehicles that are no longer in operation,
 connective structural elements, and fragments produced by break-ups
 or accidents involving space vehicles-is such that the danger of a
 collision with them has become comparable to the danger of a
 collision between meteors and long-duration space vehicles,
 spacecraft, or orbital stations. That is why an urgency attaches to
 the problem of using injection profiles in which the upper stage of
 the rocket does not remain in orbit. Just such a profile is used in
 the Shuttle system: after the second stage shuts down, the fuel tank
 separates from the craft and returns to the atmosphere, and the
 intact remains fall into a specific region of the ocean. That is how
 launches should be done in the future. A similar requirement should
 naturally be imposed on the design of space vehicles, so that just
 before they shut down, they are "pushed" from orbit, and after
 their stay and maneuvers, no structural parts or fragments whatsoever
 remain in orbit and there is no gradual build-up of dangerous
 (deadly!) garbage in near-Earth orbits.
 49.  Based on all the above, the following recommendations need to be
 made for orbital injection systems:
 50.  Use of rockets that operate on toxic components is extremely
 undesirable, at least for putting manned craft into orbit.
 C00175716
 Page: 14    of 86
 Concatenated JPRS Reports, 1991
 Document 5 of 10                                                 Page   7
 51.  Full-fledged emergency rescue systems need to be installed on
 rocket systems used for putting cosmonauts into orbit.
 52.  After injection, the upper stage of the launch vehicle should
 not be kept in orbit long.
 53.  We need to verify (if only with theoretical calculation) the
 absence of the danger of any harmful effect produced by the rocket
 fuel combustion products on the ozone layer of the atmosphere.
 54.  We must not forget what we learned in the lunar program.
 55.  On 20 July 1969, we gazed at the Moon with feelings that were
 unusual, new for us all. On that day, humans- Armstrong and
 Aldrin-were walking on its surface, at a fantastic distance of
 400,000 km away! That event was perceived as (in the words of
 Armstrong) a "giant leap for mankind." An impressive range of
 operations and an impressive result. Complete success.
 56.  The euphoria felt at the time by the project's developers and
 probably by most of the American people was understandable and quite
 natural: "We're on the Moon!  That's us on the Moon, and not those
 Russians who are eternally behind in everything.... Our natural
 position in space research has been restored-(and-prestige -------
 too) .... What we had perceived at one time as a sort of abstraction,
 a sort of pretty, unalterable detail of the sky, has turned out to be
 a real world after all, one on which you can walk, and ride-one you
 can touch. This is a historical achievement, and it's ours!"
 57.  Emotionally, that historical show that was put on for the whole
 world meant, of course, a great deal: you could feel that you were a
 participant on that unusual journey and adventure, you could feel the
 Moon under your own feet.
 58.  We could congratulate the Americans and the all the rest of us
 again on that magnificent achievement. And why not. But something
 ,raises some doubt, something is not quite right.
 59.  The landing of N. Armstrong and E. Aldrin on the Moon was the
 beginning of the lunar project. Between 1969 and 1972, the Americans
 delivered six missions to the Moon.  What can be considered a plus
 about the lunar program?
 60.  Twelve people spent time on the surface of our satellite.  In
 all, they covered nearly 100 km of it on foot or by vehicle, and they
 brought back nearly 400 kg of lunar rock. But in and of themselves
 (apart from the advertizing/souvenir aspect of the matter), those
 C00175716
 Page: 15    of 86
 Concatenated JPRS Reports, 1991
 Document 5 of 10                                          Page   8
 rocks provided no fundamentally new or valuable information to anyone
 (except, perhaps, geologists and geochemists).
 61.  Maybe some other kind of information of substance was produced?.
 It would seem not.
 62.  Positive emotions and prestige for the United States- yes, of
 course. But 11$25 billion for prestige- (that's how much those shows
 cost) sounds a little absurd. And sad.  After all, all the space
 programs that could have been performed for that immense amount of
 money must be written off as lost.
 63.  An endeavor to restore the prestige of the United States as the
 leader in technical progress was the main reason for undertaking the
 lunar program. The fact is that our country was, for a time, ahead in
 the matter of penetrating the depths of space: in 1957, we launched
 the first satellite; in 1961, we sent the first man into space.
 64.  How did such a thing come about? How did we get ahead, despite
 the immense technical potential of the United States? The fact is
 that launch vehicles, space vehicles, and spacecraft are manufactured
 in small numbers (especially back then-when space operations were
 beginning). It was virtually individual production, i.e., it was, in
 a sense, homemade. Under those conditions, leadership was determined
 by "brainpower" and efficiency. It would be  bsurd--to say that our
 brains were better than theirs; but we can, in fact, say that ours
 were no worse than theirs. And space bureaucrats and careerists had
 not yet managed to firmly attach themselves. So the initial
 conditions were roughly the same. And of course, we didn't
 underestimate the American engineers (although they underestimated
 our engineers, and, in.my opinion, many Americans still do);
 underestimating a rival is a serious mistake. And to get some
 recognition in something like making it into space was something we
 wanted. Not expecting any directive orders from the leadership, we
 set our own goals. We worked diligently, without any fascile
 optimism. After our first successes, many Americans probably felt
 some discomfort, and their pride may have even been wounded. It's
 hard to say right now who it was that proposed landing on the Moon as
 a way of restoring prestige. In the final analysis, it doesn't
 matter. But all the same, the goal clearly wasn't worth the money
 spent. That's not to belittle the magnificently executed engineering
 work of the Americans.  The point is how little the experience gained
 as a result of tackling and performing the lunar project was used.
 Over the course of the project, as a result of an immense amount of
 well-coordinated work, the Americans created not only the Apollo
 spacecraft and the Saturn 5 rocket, but also a gigantic production
 and experimental base: hold-down stands for testing rocket engines,
 equipment for preparing rockets and spacecraft for launch, etc. And
 000175716
 UNCLASSIFIED
 Page: 16    of 86
 Concatenated JPRS Reports, 1991
 Document 5 of 10                                                 Page   9
 after 1972, almost none of it was used. It was abandoned,
 discontinued: there was nowhere to continue to-the lunar program had
 turned out to be a deadend. It was an example of a clumsily
 chosen-more precisely, an incorrectly chosen- goal.
 65.  A goal involving the spending of $25 billion or even $100
 billion on a grandiose space undertaking (if the country is rich and
 the taxpayers agree to it) is not absurd in and of itself. But one
 must think clearly when making the decisions and choosing the goals.
 66.  Roughly the same must be said about the American Shuttle program
 and especially about the imitative Soviet Buran program. The idea of
 the Shuttles consisted in lowering transportation expenditures
 between Earth and orbit. The goal was a correct one. But the profile
 and design solutions that were adopted were clearly awkward, and the
 plan was not fulfilled: the delivery of cargoes to orbit with the
 Shuttle (never mind our own natural disaster, Buran) turned out to
 be, to put it lightly, considerably more expensive than delivery on
 the expendable launch vehicles that had been used earlier.
 67.  Forthcoming Tasks in Space
 68.  At present, there is still no one common opinion on the most
 important directions to be taken in the development of human activity
 in space. Slogans like "The Mars Miss ion-=fi-fnspiri1    al,'-r---
 "Let's Make an Impressive Leap Forward in the Exploration of
 Space," "Let's Open the Future...," and "Let's Explore the Solar
 System" often replace well-thought-out, logical proposals in the
 selection of paths to be taken in moving farther forward. The most
 varied of programs are being proposed.
 69.  For example, a program linked with the American astronaut Sally
 Ride proposes as the principal goals for the next 50 years the
 creation of bases on the Moon, asteroids, and planets; systems for
 traveling about the solar system; and space settlements.
 70.  Soviet scientists working in basic sciences feel that in the
 next decade we should concentrate our efforts on a study of
 near-Earth space; research on the Earth's magnetosphere; research on
 solar-terrestrial relationships, the Sun, the solar corona, and Mars;
 and astrophysical studies with unmanned space vehicles.
 71.  There are proposals that are more pragmatic. They involve a
 program for exploring near-Earth space and are aimed at developing
 satellite systems of communications and television, creating
 satellite systems for environmental monitoring and the study of the
 Earth's natural resources, developing systems of weather satellites,
 and creating in-orbit production that is economical and efficient.
 C00175716
 Page: 17    of 86
 Concatenated JPRS Reports, 1991
 Document 5 of 10                                                 Page  10
 72.  So opinions are quite diverse.
 73.  It's probably wrong to pit pragmatic endeavors against people's
 natural wish to expand the sphere of their activity and to learn more
 about the Universe and our place in it.
 74.  In choosing the path we will take from here, it would be more
 sensible to strive both to satisfy mankind's most intrinsic needs and
 to study the world around us.
 75.  Among the most urgent problems facing mankind today are the
 ecology and the depletion of natural resources, political instability
 in the world, the separation of nations and the lack of trust between
 them, and the growing overpopulation of the Earth.
 76.  In terms of studying the Universe, the following tasks, in my
 opinion, could be considered the most interesting: solar system
 studies; studies of stars, galaxies, and celestial objects at the
 edge of the Universe with astrophysical instruments; and studies of
 the possibilities of flights to the stars.
 77.  In the context of such an approach, the following basic
 directions for space operations could be proposed:
 78.  1. Activity that satisfies the intrinsic needs of mankind.  Such
 activity would involve work of an applied nature that could provide
 specific benefits to people and would be, if possible, economically
 profitable.
 79.  Such activity can be divided into three groups of operations.
 80.  Group A consists of already established, almost traditional
 operations such as environmental monitoring of land, sea, and ocean
 surfaces; studies of natural resources with space vehicles; and
 satellite services involving weather forecasting, navigation,
 detection of distress signals, and communications and television.
 81.  Group B consists of operations that set up economically
 beneficial in-orbit production and that put into orbit production
 that is necessary, but dangerous when performed on the ground.
 Setting up such operations will require the expansion of ground-based
 and, primarily, space-based experiments that seek reliable, efficient
 in-orbit technologies and that conduct research that seeks a niche in
 ground-based economics that could naturally use orbital production.
 82.  This group could include operations involving research on the
 feasibility and advisability of the creation of orbiting solar
 C00175716
 Page: 18    of 86
 Concatenated JPRS Reports, 1991
 Document 5 of 10                                          Page  11
 electric power plants that supply Earth with cheap, ecologically
 clean electrical energy.
 83.  It could also include operations on orbital stations involving
 research on the most effective activity of people working in orbit.
 84.  Group C consists of operations that maintain peace on Earth,
 that maintain stability and reinforce trust between states, and that
 prevent aggression.
 85.  That involves the creation of an international satellite system,
 open for everyone, for observing and monitoring land and ocean
 surfaces and monitoring air space and underwater activity.
 86.  Right now, it's almost just the Soviet Union and the United
 States who have satellite reconnaissance systems, which, by the way,
 still do not have all-weather capabilities and do not provide
 pictures of high enough quality at twilight or at night. Thus, it is
 being proposed that systems of satellites be created that would make
 it possible for everyone to see what is happening on Earth during
 both the day and the night, to monitor movements of troops and
 equipment and the construction of suspicious (possibly military)
 facilities, and to monitor the observance of international
 agreements.
 87.  Today's space hardware, in theory, can handle that task, and
 what's important is that the expense of creating and operating such a
 system could be borne by the world community.
 88.  There is, of course, something dishonorable about spying on each
 other. But what can we do in these times? The twentieth century has
 shown us more than once how criminals and maniacs have sometimes
 seized power.  And that after strengthening their positions within a
 state by terrorizing and roughing up their own countrymen, they have
 made brazen attempts to seize neighboring states.
 89.  An international monitoring system would make it possible for
 all interested parties to monitor suspicious movements, construction,
 and preparations (after all, no enterprise begins operation
 spontaneously-it undergoes preparations, which can be noted) and to
 cool the ardor of gangsters who have elbowed their way to power. It
 would also enable the world community to take timely measures for
 repelling aggression or even halting preparations for it.
 90.  2. Study and exploration of the solar system. Although such
 studies would hardly provide us with any fundamentally new
 information, it would simply be unintelligent not to study what is
 right under our nose. The scale of such operations is another matter.
 C00175716
 Page: 19    of 86
 Concatenated JPRS Reports, 1991
 Document 5 of 10                                                 Page  12
 This area includes studies of, for example, the Sun, asteroids, the
 Moon, Mercury, Venus, and Mars, Jupiter, Saturn, and their satellites
 and studies of the feasibility and advisability of space settlements.
 Such operations can hardly be considered to be of prime importance,
 but they shouldn't be neglected. The studies can be done with
 unmanned space vehicles. And only if the delivery of soil and air
 samples from Mars were completely unsuccessful or if we got
 information indicating that living organisms could be found on Mars
 would it be worth it to seriously consider organizing a manned
 mission to that planet.
 91.  It is implicit here that soil and air samples would be brought
 back to Earth for studies that would determine whether they contain
 living organisms, and if so, the studies would identify their genetic
 code or their mechanism of reproduction and thereby obtain
 information that would support a given hypothesis about the origins
 of life on Earth-whether it was "self-generated," or "seeded."
 92.  3. Studies of the Universe. These studies represent extremely
 interesting areas of study, areas that, one could say, stir the
 imagination. They are capable of providing us with very valuable,
 unusual information.
 93.  Such operations include studies performed with space telescopes
 placed in circumsolar and near-Earth orbits ad working in
 conjunction with interferometry; studies of the world around us, done
 with state-of-the-art orbital astrophysical instruments (on the scale
 of the Hubble space telescope) in various spectral ranges; very long
 baseline studies with optical telescopes that could be placed on the
 Moon, for example; and studies of flight to the stars.
 94.  The Space Hardware of the Near Future
 95.  Effecting such a program of operations will require that
 existing space hardware be improved, that completely new hardware be
 created, and that theoretical and experimental research be done.
 96.  One would imagine that the following hardware will be required.
 97.  1. Low-orbit systems of standardized satellites for
 environmental monitoring, natural resource studies, and weather
 observations, with ground-based computer centers for processing
 information and a computerized system for delivering the results to
 subscribers.
 98.  There is a great deal of completed research in this area already
 on hand, especially in the United States. Those operations should be
 extended to a commercial basis.  Our country could also take an
 C00175716
 Page: 20    of 86
 Concatenated JPRS Reports, 1991
 Document 5 of 10                                                 Page  13
 active part in the creation of such systems.
 99.  2. A system of platforms in geostationary orbit for global
 communications, television, environmental monitoring, natural
 resources studies, and weather observations.
 100.  A geostationary orbit is an orbit lying in the equatorial plane
 at a height of about 36,000 km above the surface of the Earth.
 Satellites in geostationary orbit do not move in relation to the
 Earth's surface. We shouldn't place too many communications
 satellites in that orbit, because they would begin to interfere with
 each other's work.  That is why, in the future, we will probably have
 to create multifunctional platforms that expand their capabilities.
 101.  3. Orbital stations, which should probably be created in
 various versions:
 102.  station/laboratories like Salyut and Mir
 103.  stations like the American space station Freedom, which is
 currently under development
 104.  orbital "cloud-stations".
 105.  I think the last type of station ts-most--promisitr.- The -concept
 of a cloud-station consists in the individual parts of the
 station-its modules-not being connected to one another in a rigid
 fashion, but "floating" near one another.
 106.  4. Orbiting factories for the production of ultrapure materials
 and biological preparations and for other production processes that
 will be profitable or better done in orbit.
 107.  5. Unmanned space vehicles that are part of an international
 satellite system for observing and monitoring land, sea, and ocean
 surfaces and air space and underwater activity, with a system for
 sending the information to subscribers.
 108.  The international monitoring system could have three
 subsystems: 12-16 satellites with optical/television gear for daytime
 observations; 12-16 satellites with radars for all-weather and
 round-the-clock observation of land and ocean surfaces, air space,
 and underwater activity (monitoring of submarine movements);
 three-six satellites with gear for monitoring in the infrared range.
 109.  Today's optical/television space systems are already making it
 possible to look at objects from orbit that are on the order of a
 meter across and to transmit the images of those objects to
 C00175716
 UNCLASSIFIED
 Page: 21    of 86
 Concatenated JPRS Reports, 1991
 Document 5 of 10                                                 Page  14
 subscribers via relay satellites.
 110.  If power is high enough, so-called side-looking radars that are
 satellite-borne make it possible to perform round-the-clock,
 all-weather observation of the surface of the Earth and the air and
 even to monitor the movements of submarines. In theory, orbital
 radars could be use to differentiate between objects that are just a
 few meters long.
 111.  Such a system of satellites could be used to update information
 on what is happening at the Earth's surface every 30-60 minutes.
 112.  6. Systems of radio telescopes placed in near-Earth and
 circumsolar orbits and operating as part of a single interferometry
 network. Radio telescopes taken to circumsolar orbit could be used to
 obtain a resolution in the ten-millionths of a second of are and to
 peer to the very edge of our Universe.
 113.  Moreover, large radio telescopes on the order of a kilometer in
 size would enable man to begin a regular search for signals from
 extraterrestrial civilizations.
 114.  7. Orbital astrophysical observatories working in various
 spectral ranges.
 115.  8. If theoretical research confirms the wisdom of creating
 optical telescopes with mirrors spaced considerable distances apart,
 then it may turn out that they would best be placed on the Moon. The
 idea behind such telescopes is the same idea used in
 radiointerferometry-increasing the baseline of observation. But that
 baseline must be maintained and must be known with an accuracy down
 to tiny fractions of the wavelength of electromagnetic radiation at
 which the observation is being made, i.e., in this case, with an
 accuracy to fractions of a micron. That is where the idea came from
 to place them on the Moon.
 116.  9. The need could arise to create a lunar base that could be
 used as astrophysical observatories on the surface of the Moon and as
 a base for studying the possibility of using lunar minerals in man's
 space-based activities. But the wisdom of opening operations in that
 area will, in my opinion, require additional consideration in the
 coming decades.
 117.  10. Unmanned vehicles for bringing Martian soil and air samples
 back to Earth.
 118.  11. If, as a result of those operations, it becomes necessary
 to perform a mission to Mars, then we will have to develop and build
 C00175716
 Page: 22    of 86
 Concatenated JPRS Reports, 1991
 Document 5 of 10                                                 Page  15
 the appropriate systems for a manned mission: Mars orbiter and Mars
 mission module, a Mars "automobile," and the appropriate gear for
 living on Mars and doing research there.
 119.  12. Unmanned systems for studying Venus, an orbital base near
 Venus, atmospheric balloon-probes, systems for performing radar
 mapping of the surface, and landable laboratories.
 120.  13. Solar observatories with the perihelion inside the orbit of
 Mercury; they would be intended for studies performed on a regular
 basis of the star closest to us-our Sun.
 121.  14. Unmanned vehicles for studies of the asteroids.
 122.  15. Unmanned space vehicles for studies of the distant planets.
 123.  16. Truly inexpensive, reusable transport craft for transport
 operations between Barth and orbit.
 124.  Neither the American Shuttle nor the Soviet Buran is capable of
 solving the problem of lowering the transportation costs in space.
 Right now, the cost of putting payloads into orbit with the Shuttle
 system is about $10,000 per kilogram payload-that is much more
 expensive than even with the old, expendable launch vehicles. Which
 means that the problem of creating truly lei xpens#ve systems for-
 putting space vehicles into orbit is still with us. In my opinion,
 such new systems should be able to lift space vehicles into orbit at
 a cost of somewhere in the hundreds of dollars per kilogram. That
 will be a difficult problem, but we can solve it with today's
 technology.
 125.  17. Inexpensive reusable transport systems for transport
 operations between low orbit and geostationary orbit.
 126.  18. Space robots. We should expect an expansion of operations
 in open space in Earth-satellite orbits. Such operations will involve
 the creation of orbiting factories and large radio telescopes, the
 maintenance of orbital vehicles, and possibly the construction of
 orbiting electric power plants. The difficulty of movement
 experienced by individuals clothed in the armor of a space suit and
 the dangers of working in open space will compel us to develop space
 robots.
 127.  Below, individual areas of operations are examined.
 128.  Orbital Injection Systems
 129.  The main thing we have to do is create truly inexpensive
 C00175716
 Page: 23    of 86
 Concatenated JPRS Reports, 1991
 Document 5 of 10                                                 Page  16
 reusable systems for placing space vehicles into orbit.
 130.  At the moment, the cost of putting space vehicles into orbit is
 extremely high. That stems from the high cost of rocket engines, the
 complex control system, the expensive materials used in rocket and
 engine structures, and, primarily, their one-time use. It was natural
 that as early as in the 1970s, someone got the idea to create a
 reusable injection system.
 131.  The first bit of experience that was acquired in implementing
 that idea was the creation of the Shuttle system.  In spite of the
 marvelous work that was done, that experience can hardly be called
 successful. In the original project, the cost of a launch of the
 system was not to exceed a sum on the order of $10 million. But that
 was too optimistic an estimate, and in years past the cost of
 launching the system has fluctuated between $150 million and $350
 million. The main reasons for that are these: the use of a
 considerable number of expendable elements in the structure; a very
 complex design and, accordingly, complex preparations for launch in
 which a great many specialists must take part. It must be said, of
 course, that the analogous Soviet Buran system is no better than the
 Shuttle system in that regard.
 132.  That is why the creation of a truly reusable, truly inexpensive
 system for placing space vehicles into orbit- re:ent--task-
 In that connection, a solution to the problem may be sought in two
 directions.
 133.  The first is rather trivial: create a reusable, single-stage,
 oxygen/hydrogen rocket with a highly advanced design.  That rocket
 would go into orbit, deposit the space vehicle there, and then
 descend from orbit, decelerate in the dense layers of the atmosphere,
 and make a landing in the vicinity of the launch. That would be
 possible if we managed to develop a design in which the mass of the
 tanks, the engines, the heat shield, the return rocket's landing
 system, the control system, and the space vehicle itself that is
 being placed into orbit did not exceed 10-11 percent of the launch
 mass. That would require ultrastrong, ultralight materials, plus very
 light engines, heat shield, and landing system. The task is a very
 difficult one, and there are a number of design ideas for resolving
 it, but they require additional research and analysis.
 134.  The other means of solving the problem is revolutionary.  It is
 based on the principal shortcoming of today's rockets: their tanks
 contain not only propellant, but also oxidizer (which must also be
 lifted), even though a segment of the flight is through the dense
 layers of the atmosphere, where oxygen is quite abundant and would
 seem quite logical to use. But that's not incidental-use of
 C00175716
 Page: 24    of 86
 Concatenated JPRS Reports, 1991
 Document 5 of 10                                                 Page  17
 atmospheric oxygen on the rocket would require air-breathing jet
 engines, in addition to liquid-propellant engines (a large segment of
 the flight still proceeds outside the dense layers). And they're much
 heavier than liquid-propellant engines. But new possibilities are now
 appearing in that connection. Today, the creation of combined engines
 that operate in air-breathing jet mode in the initial part of the
 flight, at speeds of up to 1500-1700 m/s, and then switch to
 liquid-propellant mode, is becoming a reality. That could provide a
 considerable advantage in launch-vehicle mass and size.
 135.  Those ideas apparently formed the basis of the English project
 Hotol. That airplane is supposed to take off from an airport, aided
 by a special launch chassis that remains on the ground. It then
 accelerates to an altitude of around 25 km with an engine that takes
 in oxygen from the atmosphere. At that point, it is traveling at a
 speed of about 1600 m/s. After that, the flight is performed with
 onboard reserves of oxygen. Liquid hydrogen is proposed as the
 propellant for both segments of the flight.  According to the design,
 Hotol, with a launch mass of around 200 tons, is supposed to place a
 payload of around 7 tons into orbit and then return to Earth.
 Judging from the articles in the press, the work on the project has
 been halted-there's no financing. It is difficult to judge the
 feasibility of the project, because that feasibility hinges almost
 entirely on the feasibility of proposals involving the creation of a
 lightweight combined engine capable of-operating-in-an abreathing-------------
 Jet mode and a liquid-propellant mode, but almost no materials have
 been published on its working principle.  The engine was developed by
 the well-known English firm, Rolls-Royce.
 136.  Work is being done in other promising directions. The German
 Sanger project also calls for the creation of a completely reusable
 two-stage system. The first stage is supposed to use air-breathing
 jet engines, and the second stage, liquid-propellant engines. After
 expending its fuel, the first stage is supposed to return to the
 airport. The second stage, after placing the payload into orbit,
 returns to Earth and is readied, along with the first stage, for the
 next flight. But the data cited in the press on the estimates of the
 mass characteristics of the components of the system have raised some
 doubts as to the soundness of the characteristics.
 137.  An even more revolutionary direction is being pursued at
 present in the United States. It is based on the idea of the creation
 of a ramjet engine capable of operating at speeds of up to around 7.5
 km/s, i.e., virtually the entire process of acceleration of the
 rocket-airplane is done in the atmosphere, and almost no oxidizer is
 carried in the rocket. The basic research, as far as one can tell, is
 aimed at studying the possibility of creating such an engine.
 C00175716
 Page: 25    of 86
 Concatenated JPRS Reports, 1991
 Document 5 of 10                                                Page  18
 138.  Orbiting Solar Electric Power Plants
 139.  One possible direction in the development of space-based
 operations to meet the basic needs.of mankind involves the creation
 of orbiting solar electric power plants for supplying energy to
 ground-based consumers.  Solar energy can be converted into
 electrical energy in various ways. But the simplest and most natural
 for our purposes is to use semiconductor converters that transform
 sunlight energy into an electrical current, i.e., solar panels. We
 have already accumulated experience in their long-term operation in
 space. Silicon cells are usually used as the converters-thin, small
 (several centimeters square) wafers in which a potential difference
 arises as a result the photoeffect that is produced when sunlight
 strikes them. Only a very small amount of power is derived from one
 such cell. The energy conversion efficiency in such a converter is on
 the order of 10-12 percent. To make a practical power-supply source
 out of those cells, they are linked in a series-parallel circuit. As
 a result, from one square meter-of solar panel, one can obtain a
 quantity of power on the order of 140-170 W. Of course, such panels
 produce a current only under solar illumination, and such a level of
 power is produced only if the Sun's rays are perpendicular to the
 surface of the panels. That is why on many space vehicles, special
 systems orient the solar panels to increase the derived power. When
 the vehicle passes in the shadow of the Earth, the instruments and
 equipment get their electrical power supply-from--storage-batteri-es-
 that had been recharged by the solar panels when the vehicle was
 outside the shadow.
 140.  Orbiting solar electric power plants would be useful for
 supplying Earth with electrical energy. The electrical energy
 produced by the solar panels could be transformed into radio waves
 and transmitted in the form of a narrow beam to a receiving antenna
 on the Earth's surface by the pencilbeam antenna of the orbiting
 electric power plant. The waves received on Earth could then be
 reconverted into electrical energy and sent to consumers. In order
 for orbiting electric power plants to have continuous and immediate
 communications with ground receiving stations, the orbiting plants
 are best placed in geostationary orbit.
 141.  The most important thing in the creation of orbiting solar
 electric power plants is to master building in space gigantic
 structures that must be lightweight and steerable in orbit. We could
 begin, for example, with the assembly of an openwork panel unit that
 is, say, 100 x 100 x 100 m. And then, by gradually linking such units
 to one another, we could increase the area of the structure to dozens
 of square kilometers. A panel 100 sq m in area could derive as much
 as 10 million kilowatts of power.  Transmitting the energy back to
 Earth from such an orbiting electric power plant would require an
 C00175716
 Page: 26    of 86
 Concatenated JPRS Reports, 1991
 Document 5 of 10                                                Page  19
 antenna nearly one square kilometer in area. The ground-based
 receiving antenna would have to have a diameter on the order of
 several kilometers. It would probably be best not only to assemble
 the components of the panel units in orbit, but also to manufacture
 them in orbit. That is, to put, say, rolls of metal ribbon into
 orbit, cut it up there, and make rods from it, which would be used
 then to assemble trussed panel structures. Of course, other
 technologies for manufacturing and assembling the panels could also
 be found.
 142.  Needless to say, today's solar panel sheets couldn't be
 installed on those gigantic structures-they would be too heavy and
 expensive, because a square meter of solar panel has a mass of
 several kilograms. In recent years, however, a modicum of success has
 been achieved in the creation of film-type solar panels, a square
 meter of which might have a mass of only several hundred grams.  In
 light of the mass of the trusses and other components of the
 structure, the adjusted mass of a square meter of panel on the solar
 electric power plant must be roughly a kilogram per square meter of
 panel and, consequently, about 10 kg per kilowatt of installed power
 (the mass must be that so that the creation of the solar electric
 power plant would be profitable, and that is achievable).  A kilowatt
 of power produced by the orbiting power plant would then cost about
 2,000-3,000 rubles (assuming the transport problem is solved). That
 is one and a half-to-two times cheaper than power from nuclear
 electric power plants, two-to-two and a half times cheaper than power
 from hydroelectric power plants, and four-six times cheaper than
 power from fuel-fired electric power plants. Orbital electric power
 plants, however, do not use up natural resources, and after several
 years of operation, they can be more economical than fuel-fired or
 nuclear electric power plants. And the main thing is, such plants
 would be ecologically clean.
 143.  The most difficult problem surrounding orbiting solar electric
 power plants is the problem of putting the materials into orbit for
 the construction of the plant. The mass of a 10 million kV plants
 would be around 100,000 tons. Solving that problem would require the
 creation of a completely new type of reusable launch vehicle. On one
 hand, it would have to be a rather large vehicle capable of lifting a
 payload of, say, around 500 tons, so that the construction materials
 for one plant could be put into orbit within two or three years (with
 70-100 launches a year) and the construction could be effected with
 the same speed. On the other hand, if the undertaking is to be
 economical, the cost of a launch with such a vehicle must be no more
 than 50 rubles per kilogram of payload.  If you compare that figure
 with the figure for the cost of using the Shuttle system to put a
 payload into orbit (on the order of $10,000 per kilogram), the
 difficulty of the problem becomes clear. The launch cost must be
 C00175716
 Page: 27    of 86
 Concatenated JPRS Reports, 1991
 Document 5 of 10                                                 Page  20
 reduced by two orders of magnitude. The task, however, is not a
 hopeless one. In economic terms, the Shuttle system is an order of
 magnitude more expensive than even today's expendable launch
 vehicles. And reducing spending by an order of magnitude by switching
 to a new type of reusable launch vehicle is not impossible. Of
 course, at the same time we would have to also solve the problem of
 moving materials that had been placed in a low intermediate orbit to
 a geostationary orbit.
 144.  And on that segment of travel, the expense would have to be
 about the same, i.e., for that segment we would also have to create
 cheap reusable systems that would probably use solar panels and
 electric engines.
 145.  Orienting the gigantic trusswork panels toward the Sun is a
 problem that is entirely solvable. After all, in practical terms, we
 would have to rotate the panel at a constant rate equal to one
 revolution per year.
 146.  Building the power plant in orbit would require specialized
 production. It would require builders. They would need
 housing-orbital stations. Of course, all production would have to be
 as standardized and automated as possible. The construction would
 have to be done primarily by robots. Which is why there would be only
 a few people there. They could work in or-bTt-for, say, no more -thin-a--
 year per "tour," which would mean that artificial gravity would not
 be needed on the builders' stations.
 147.  There are, of course, many other problems associated with the
 creation of orbiting solar electric power stations: the conversion of
 enormous outputs of electrical energy to radio waves, the onboard
 directional antenna with a diameter of about a kilometer, the systems
 for receiving the powerful stream of radio waves and converting them
 back into electrical energy, etc. But all those problems are in the
 realm of reality.
 148.  Space-based electric power plants are attractive because they
 can make a substantial contribution to the solution of one of the
 most difficult problems facing mankind today-the creation of
 ecologically clean power engineering. This is not an attempt to
 convince the reader that orbiting solar electric power stations
 represent the only sensible means of solving that problem. It cannot
 be seriously compared with any other until competitive projects as
 such are developed. But it is one possible, hopeful solution.
 149.  Orbiting Factories
 150.  Automated factories in orbit are promising and feasible.
 C00175716
 Page: 28    of 86
 Concatenated JPRS Reports, 1991
 Document 5 of 10                                                 Page  21
 Weightlessness and the vacuum can be used to advantage in the
 production of the ultrapure preparations and materials that are
 needed in today's medicine and in industry. Of course, there cannot
 be absolute weightlessness on orbital vehicles-it exists only in the
 center of mass of the vehicle. But at points meters away from the
 center of mass, the accelerations are only a millionth of the
 acceleration due to gravity on Earth. And the vacuum is not at all
 absolute in orbits with an altitude of around 500 km. Nevertheless,
 both the accelerations due to microgravity and the pressure of the
 ambient atmosphere at such altitudes are rather low, which creates
 good conditions for certain types of production. The low
 accelerations due to microgravity make it possible to virtually
 eliminate from separation and crystallization the influence of the
 convection associated with the splitting of components in a mixture
 by the force of gravity and to dramatically reduce the number of
 defects formed in crystallization. Experimental operations that have
 been performed on orbital stations, manned spacecraft, and unmanned
 space vehicles in the context of research on the efficiency of
 various production processes in orbit show that the quality of the
 processes is improved in weightlessness. But we have yet to achieve a
 level that enables us to draw definite conclusions and begin
 designing orbiting factories.
 151.  Areas that hold promise today are those that involve production
 processes associated with the purification o  biological preparats
 on electrophoresis units of any kind for the pharmaceutical industry,
 processes associated with the growth of crystals of materials used in
 the electronics industry, processes associated with raising the
 purity and relative mass of output of a product, and processes
 associated with the production of optical glass fiber for fiber
 optics, which in orbit can yield better products and can be more
 economical than can ground-based production.
 152.  Radio Telescopes
 153.  Radio telescopes in near-Earth orbits or, what is more
 effective, in Sun-satellite orbits may be one of the most effective
 means of studying the Universe. With receiving antennas that are
 hundreds of meters in diameter, radio telescopes can detect signals
 from objects that are at the edge of our Universe. If observations
 are made with several radio telescopes spaced across a distance on
 the order of the diameter of a solar orbit, the principles of
 interferometry can be used to produce, as mentioned earlier, an
 absolutely fantastic resolution in the ten-millionths of a second of
 are. The size itself of receiving antennas that are hundreds of
 meters across need not be disturbing-the erection of structures of
 such dimensions in weightlessness is entirely feasible with today's
 technology. The main problem would be ensuring precision of surface
 C00175716
 Page: 29    of 86
 Concatenated JPRS Reports, 1991
 Document 5 of 10                                                 Page  22
 of the antenna. After all, the precision must be to a fraction of the
 wavelength at which the measurements will be made. For example, for
 observations made at 20 cm, the precision of the surface would have
 to be such that it is measured in centimeters for a structure a
 kilometer across! And the thermal deformations of the structure would
 also have to be in. the centimeters. The problem, it seems, would have
 to be solved by using adjusting elements and a laser measuring
 system.
 155.  The idea of a cloud-station owes its existence to the
 difficulties associated with the creation and functioning of large
 structures such as the American orbital station Freedom, which is
 under development at this time. Such difficulties include the
 following:
 156.  the enormous size of the trusswork structures that hold the
 living quarters, fueling stations, production facilities, telescopes,
 solar panels, and transport craft, which results in enormous moments
 of inertia and in difficulties in orienting such structures
 157.  excessive programming of such stations, which limits the
 possibilities for developing and improving production and research
 programs
 158.  the inclusion of production facilities in the same structure as
 the other facilities leads to an increase in the levels of
 microgravity in the production facilities, which in all likelihood
 would have an effect on the quality of the product being made and
 would require restrictions on orientation and control of motion and
 on crew activity
 159.  the operation of first-class telescopes requires attitude
 control with an accuracy to within hundredths of a second of arc,
 which would probably be impossible for the entire structure, even if
 freedom of angular movement relative to the station structure were
 provided for the telescopes
 160.  the inclusion in the station structure of fuel containers that
 generally hold hypergolic components and a complex pneumohydraulic
 system for taking on fuel from refueling craft and for distributing
 it to the users in the station is not without danger and is to be
 considered undesirable.
 161.  On the other hand, it is natural to locate all those facilities
 near one another, in order to be able to adjust, repair, test, and
 maintain all the telescopes, production laboratories, plants, and
 C00175716
 Page: 30    of 86
 Concatenated JPRS Reports, 1991
 Document 5 of 10                                                 Page  23
 fueling stations.
 162.  Those difficulties and contradictions can be eliminated by
 using a cloud-station system. Imagine a station consisting of several
 autonomous units-for example, the living quarters base unit, an
 astrophysical observatory, a production/laboratory module, and a
 fueling module. All the units are flying in the same orbit, not too
 far from one another, such that the distance from the base unit to
 any of the other units is always within a certain range (say, 10-100
 km). To accomplish that,.each unit needs to have a system for
 measuring distance and radial velocity relative to the base unit and
 a propulsion system with motors for making coordinate shifts.
 163.  The pattern of action is rather simple here. The rate at which
 a unit moves away or approaches is reduced to a minimum that is
 determined by the sensitivity of relative velocity meters. Assume
 that it is 1.5 cm/s. Then the distance increases to 50 km from 10
 (depending on the features of the motion of the satellite in orbit)
 over a period of roughly nine-10 days. When the distance nears 50 km,
 the outer unit fires an impulse that changes the sign of the relative
 velocity, and the unit begins to approach the station and pulls up to
 within that original 10 km within another nine days, etc. If the
 relative velocity is measured with an accuracy on the order of a
 centimeter per second (which is quite realistic for today's radars),
 then the amount of fuel required for keeptig the units~f thetativn              - in a given relative position is considerably less than the amount we
 must use in any case to compensate for the atmospheric drag on the
 station.  Thus, the telescope, for example, can be kept 10-50 km
 behind the base unit, with the production module 10-50 km ahead and
 the fueling module still farther ahead, say, 60-100 km from the base
 unit.
 164.  The makeup of such a cloud-station could expand and change. It
 would be natural to use the base unit of the station, where the duty
 shift of cosmonauts are located, also as a geophysical module, with
 gear for environmental monitoring, for studying natural resources,
 etc.  Hardware for medical and biological research could also be
 located there.
 165.  The base unit would also have several docking positions for
 manned spacecraft and cargo resupply craft and for orbital
 "cars"-vehicles designed to fly the cosmonauts between station
 units for maintenance purposes.
 167.  Without concerning ourselves with the question of the
 timeliness or level of priority associated with the creation of a
 C00175716
 Page: 31    of 86
 Concatenated JPRS Reports, 1991
 Document 5 of 10                                                 Page  24
 lunar base in the coming decades, let's try to imagine what it would
 look like and how much work would be done there. (We intend to
 publish a brochure on lunar base projects in the near future.-Ed.)
 168.  The tasks performed by the lunar base could include regular
 studies of the Hoon (seismicity, meteoritic conditions, structure,
 geology, exploration for lunar minerals useful to man), empirical
 verification of the possibility and advisability of mining minerals,
 and construction of an astrophysical observatory if further studies
 demonstrated the advisability of creating one on the Moon, where the
 absence of an atmosphere, the low gravity factor, and the possibility
 of installing telescopes on immobile foundations would seem, at first
 glance, to offer important advantages over Earth-based and orbital
 telescopes.
 169.  The last task could turn out to be a rather important one,
 especially if we manage to demonstrate the possibility of building
 synthetic-aperture telescopes with reflectors spaced as far apart as
 possible.
 170.  The base would naturally have an information-and-control
 center, laboratories, separate cabin-apartments for the base workers,
 areas for physical exercise, a messroom, a wardroom, and a kitchen;
 an airlock/hangar for servicing and repairing lunar rovers;
 production facilities; a power plant; sys a ms for die support and
 temperature maintenance; a greenhouse; warehouses for things like
 spare parts, fuel, and collected samples; lunar rovers for research
 expeditions, transport vehicles, and hangars for them; and
 hangar/shelters for on-duty emergency evacuation craft.
 171.  Since the flight of a transport craft and crew to the Moon
 could cost around $1 billion, such a mission would naturally be
 geared to a lengthy stay by the specialists at the base. In addition,
 we would need to take into consideration the isolation and the
 psychological stress associated with working at the base. For that
 reason, we will need to provide rather comfortable living and working
 conditions for the lunar base crew. The crew would best consist of
 five or six individuals, each with two or three specialties.
 172.  Each crew member would need to have a separate cabin, 50-100 cu
 meters, with all the conveniences. In addition, there would have to
 be backup living quarters for overtime work and for emergency
 situations. Roughly the same amount of space would have to be
 earmarked for the main and backup information-and-control centers,
 laboratories, gyms, messroom, wardroom, kitchen, and production
 facilities. The total amount of space for the pressurized areas,
 including living quarters, could be around 2,000 cu meters. In light
 of the the theoretically ever-present danger of depressurization,
 C00175716
 Page: 32    of 86
 Concatenated JPRS Reports, 1991
 Document 5 of 10                                                 Page  25
 fire, or contamination of the atmosphere with harmful gases, the
 pressurized spaces would have to be sectioned off and each section
 would have to have emergency entrances and exits. Pressurized spaces
 would best be shaped in the form of a cylinder 3-4 m in diameter.
 173.  Then there is the question of protecting pressurized spaces
 from meteors and from the large temperature differential on the lunar
 surface as day turns to night. We could, of course, use measures that
 are typically used for orbital space vehicles-screens and
 screen-and-vacuum insulation. But on the Moon, it would probably be
 more natural and more effective to bury the station structures in the
 ground and cover the top of the station with the excavated soil.
 Before the top of the station is covered, naturally, everything would
 have to be finished-e.g., all the structural assemblies, all the
 mainlines, all the plumbing, all the cable systems. The giant
 structures-that make up the stations quarters cannot be transported
 from Earth in finished form. It would make sense to take up pre-cut
 sheets for enclosures-plus "semifinished products" in the form of
 frame parts, hatches, and, among other things, "pipe-jacket"
 reducers-and then to use, mostly, robots for doing the welding right
 at the prepared construction site for the base.
 174.  It is clear that construction of the base would have to be
 preceded by a lunar reconnaissance mission that surveys the area
 chosen for the construction of the-base and-trings-constructi-on
 equipment (scrapers, crane excavators) and construction materials
 from Earth. There would have to be, obviously, a landing of several
 construction missions to prepare the construction site (ground work),
 roads, and landing areas for cargo resupply vessels and manned
 spacecraft and, finally, to do the construction itself. And that, in
 turn, means that a temporary station would have to be brought up for
 those who are building the base.
 175.  The information-and-control center must be the conduit for
 information from Earth, from lunar rovers with researchers aboard
 (who may be hundreds of kilometers from the base, i.e., far beyond
 its visible horizon), and from workers who may be outside pressurized
 compartments at any given time, plus telemetry from onboard base
 systems. All that means that in order for the on-duty operator to be
 able to identify the current situation, there must be completely
 automated, computer processing of all incoming information, with
 output of correlated evaluations of the situation as a whole and of
 the situation for each distinct system and for each individual
 outside the base. The results of the analysis must presented clearly
 on electronic boards and displays, and recommendations must be given
 to the operator. Thus, powerful software must be created to replace
 the hundreds of specialists who work in flight control centers,
 analyzing already processed information and preparing recommendations
 C00175716
 Page: 33    of 86
 Concatenated JPRS Reports, 1991
 Document 5 of 10                                                 Page  26
 for flight directors and cosmonauts.  Of course, in theory, we could
 preserve the system that has come about for analyzing situations that
 come up on manned spacecraft missions and the system for arriving at
 a decision in the ground-based flight control center.  But in a
 decade or two, such systems will probably be declared to be not
 reliable enough and too expensive.
 176.  For telephone and television communications with lunar rovers
 that are beyond the base's radio horizon, we could use lunar relay
 satellites or base/Earth-relay/lunar-rover and
 lunar-rover/Earth-relay/base links. Communicating through an
 Earth-based relay would be awkward, because there would be a time lag
 of about five seconds.  We will apparently have to use both versions,
 because a lunar relay satellite won't always be in the radio horizon
 of the base and the lunar rover. Naturally, the
 information-and-control center must have telephone and
 video-communications systems, with all the necessary working space
 and living space, as well as outside areas (fueling station, power
 plant, landing areas, etc.). In addition, provisions must be made to
 ensure that the space outside and the surrounding area can be
 surveyed with television cameras.
 177.  The problem of power supply to the base is complicated by the
 fact that the two-week day will be followed by the two-week night.
 Therefore, if the power-supply system is based on smear panes , then
 the problem of where to get energy at night must be solved right
 away. Even if a "hibernation" mode is used by the station, that
 will require storage batteries weighing many tons. Besides, going
 into hibernation for two weeks out of every four would be
 inefficient.
 178.  To be able to use as storage devices water-electrolyzer systems
 that work during the day to store electrical energy and
 electrochemical generators that work at night to output the energy
 would require the creation of giant installations with enormous gas
 tanks for hydrogen and oxygen.
 179.  A suitable solution would probably be to use a small nuclear
 electric power plant (more precisely, two or three power-generating
 units set apart from one another). The generating units would have to
 be brought to the Moon in finished form (but not switched on) as
 priority cargo for the construction of the base and would have to be
 one of the first things to be installed.
 180.  The temperature-regulation system will have to ensure
 acceptable conditions that are fairly comfortable for the base's crew
 in terms of the inside temperature and conditions that are acceptable
 for gear and equipment in pressurized and nonpressurized station
 C00175716
 Page: 34    of 86
 Concatenated JPRS Reports, 1991
 Document 5 of 10                                                 Page  27
 facilities during the day and the night. Thermal insulation and the
 radiator removal of excessive heat solve that problem during the day.
 But night will require heating. The heat source will probably have to
 be the heat given off by the nuclear power-generating units or the
 heat from isotope heaters. In addition, the system will have to
 collect moisture from the air of the inside spaces of the base.
 181.  The high cost of delivering supplies to the Moon is the reason
 that closed-loop life-support systems will be used as much as
 possible. It would be difficult for everything to be in a closed-loop
 system, but water and oxygen could certainly be in a completely
 closed-loop system if electrolysis of water collected from the air,
 urine, and carbon dioxide were used. Nearly 300 kg of dehydrated food
 and about 100 kg of expendable materials would have to be taken for
 each individual per year. Such a system would have to be included in
 the base's equipment. But, of course, we need to try to solve the
 closed-loop problem for food, too. That would take complex equipment,
 higher levels of energy use, and more space. The task of creating a
 closed-loop system for oxygen, water, and food must be included in
 the programs of operation of space hardware for the coming decades. A
 closed-loop system for oxygen and water only would require about
 300-400 W of electrical energy per person (i.e., about 2.5 kW for
 that one system alone). Of course, there must also be emergency
 reserves of oxygen, water, and food.
 182.  Life-support gear would include gear that would be brought up
 to the Moon, namely the following: clothing, underwear, and footwear;
 replacement parts for things like autonomous life-support systems,
 EVA suits, lunar rovers, tractors, and crane hoists; medical
 diagnostic and treatment gear; and exercise machines.
 183.  The base, naturally, would have to have advanced transport
 vehicles: lunar rovers for research expeditions, trucks, scrapers,
 portable drilling installations, excavators, etc.
 184.  At this point, it seems that it would be wise for the base to
 also have an on-duty evacuation craft to be used in the event of an
 emergency at the station.
 185.  And finally, the main thing is that equipment for scientific
 research and exploration must be developed.
 186.  A serious estimate of the mass of the base structures that will
 have to be delivered from Earth and an estimate of the costs will be
 possible only after formulation of the project gets under way.
 Preliminary estimates put the figures at about 100 tons for the mass
 and around $100 billion (or 100 billion rubles) for the cost of the
 operations to create the station.
 000175716
 Page: 35    of 86
 Concatenated JPRS Reports, 1991
 Document 5 of 10                                                 Page  28
 188.  The very first question that comes up is, Why? Exactly why do
 we need to be undertaking such a grandiose enterprise right now?
 There are no convincing arguments for it. Just the opposite-one can
 easily see an element of children's logic: "It's a place we can
 reach and visit-so we need to go there!"
 190.  Mercury would be harder to reach (the trip would take a great
 deal of energy), and it's too hot there, and there's no atmosphere,
 and there's nothing to do there, as it were-it's the same rocky
 desert as on the Moon.
 191.  Venus, to put it mildly, is too hot at the surface (450-500?C),
 and the pressure would be absolutely unbearable (100 atm), so we
 couldn't land there.
 192.  Jupiter, Saturn, and the planets beyond are even worse and more
 complex-it would take much more energy to get that far, and the force
 of gravity is greater, and the atmosphere-don't even mention it.
 193.  But Mars-that's another matter. The gravity-at-the-surfaces
 0.4 Earth gravity. The atmosphere, although quite rarefied, still
 exists. And the temperatures are not as severe as on the Moon.
 194.  In a word, Mars is more natural and more accessible.
 195.  But what is still not understood is this: Why do we need to
 send a mission there? "How can you ask that?" answer the
 proponents. "We're going to have to colonize Mars sooner or later."
 But why do we need to colonize Mars?  It's clearly not suitable for
 human life. We could see setting up a base on Mars (if and when we
 see that it's needed), but it's hard to imagine a need to colonize
 196.  And yet, there is one problem whose solution could justify
 sending a mission to Mars-the search for life on that planet. There
 is some basis for hope (however slight it may be) that life exists:
 there are the remnants of an atmosphere, and photos of the surface of
 Mars show traces of water erosion. Might there not be simple
 organisms there, life on the level of, say, bacteria or fungi? Those
 living organisms themselves would not, in fact, be of as much
 interest as would the mechanism of their reproduction. What kind of
 mechanism would that be? The same as on Earth (and on Earth, from the
 standpoint of the organization of that mechanism, we are all-plants
 C00175716
 Page: 36    of 86
 Concatenated JPRS Reports, 1991
 Document 5 of 10                                                Page  29
 and animals-relatives)? If the mechanism were identical, the
 hypothesis of the "seeding" of life throughout the Universe would
 be probable (it wouldn't be absolute proof-it would be one
 experimental point). If the mechanisms turned out to be completely
 different, the theory of the self-generation of life would be
 essentially confirmed.
 197.  Of course, it would be natural to try to "catch" living
 organisms with unmanned vehicles that landed on Mars.  Such vehicles
 have been landed, but nothing has come of it. And there have been too
 few points of collection of samples, and the procedures themselves of
 analysis of samples for "life" are not very conclusive.
 198.  The Mars mission could be a continuation of the work done with
 unmanned vehicles. Possible tasks for the mission could be the
 exploration and study of areas of the Martian surface where there is
 some sort of chance of finding signs of life, a search for living
 organisms or plants, the collection of soil samples (at various
 points on the surface and at various depths) and air samples, an
 initial, on-site study of such samples (so that the research program
 could be adjusted in the event of positive findings), the delivery of
 the soil and air samples to Earth, and the study of the surface of
 Mars, the planet's structure, and the planet's natural history.
 199.  The equipment for a Mars mission w6ulA--be"der-iriefi-largely by
 the primary operations performed during the mission and by the
 mission profile itself. For a Mars mission, it would be natural to
 adopt the basic profile used for the American lunar mission:
 trans-Mars injection from Earth satellite orbit, flight to Mars, Mars
 orbit insertion, descent to the surface of Mars of the mission module
 with some crew members (the others in the crew would remain in the
 orbiter in a Mars satellite orbit), research on the planet surface,
 collection of soil and air samples, return of the mission module to
 satellite orbit, rendezvous and docking with the orbiter, transfer of
 the landing party to the orbiter, trans-Earth injection from Mars
 satellite orbit, return of the mission to Earth.
 200.  Two components immediately become distinct: the orbiter and the
 mission module. Their appearance depends substantially on the amount
 of fuel needed for performing the dynamic operations associated with
 changes in the velocity of motion of the two craft. The amount of
 fuel spent in a given dynamic operation is determined by the
 magnitude of the required increase in velocity, by engine quality,
 and by vehicle mass. That is why in the process of analysis, before
 the choice of design profile or type of engine, the energy
 expenditures are usually characterized in terms of the increase in
 velocity of a vehicle (with the integrator) for the various stages of
 the flight.
 C00175716
 Page: 37    of 86
 Concatenated JPRS Reports, 1991
 Document 5 of 10                                                Page  30
 201.  Those expenditures tentatively appear to be the following for a
 Mars mission spacecraft:
 202.  1. Injection of the complex from an Earth satellite orbit to a
 trans-Mars trajectory: 3.6-4 km/s (depending on how close it is to
 the optimal date for injection).
 203.  2. Expenditures for the orbiter:
 204.  insertion into Mars satellite orbit: 0.1-1.5 km/s (depending on
 the method of orbital insertion and the orbital parameters chosen)
 205.  injection of orbiter from Mars satellite orbit to trans-Earth
 trajectory: 0.5-1.5 km/s (depending on Mars satellite orbit
 parameters)
 206.  insertion into Earth satellite orbit: 0-3.2 km/s (depending on
 return profile chosen-either with immediate reentry, or with a
 preliminary "stop" in Earth satellite orbit).
 207.  3. Expenditures for the mission module:
 208.  descent from orbit into a descent trajectory, plus landing:
 0.2-/3 km/s
 209.  insertion from Martian surface into Mars satellite orbit:
 5.3-4.2 km/s (depending on parameters of orbit in which orbiter is
 waiting)
 210.  rendezvous and docking with orbiter: 0.1-0.2 km/s.
 211.  Those data show that a great deal is considerably more
 accessible and determinable for a Mars mission spacecraft. The power
 needs and the appearance of the craft can be described here and now.
 212.  The Mars mission module will have two propulsion systems: one
 on the larder (for the descent and landing), the other on the ascent
 stage (for orbital insertion and rendezvous and docking with the
 orbiter).
 213.  The operating conditions and the large number of cut-ins (the
 steering engines will have thousands) determine the fuel components:
 high-boiling-point, hypergolic-and, thus, toxic-components such as
 nitrogen tetroxide gas and nonsymmetrical dimethylhydrazine. The
 toxicity of the components represents asubstantial drawback,
 especially since the cosmonauts will have to go out onto the planet's
 surface, which is "flooded" with the components. And besides,
 C00175716
 Page: 38    of 86
 Concatenated JPRS Reports, 1991
 Document 5 of 10                                           Page  31
 something is wrong with things when people show up on planet where
 they're searching for life, and they begin by poisoning the landing
 site and the living organisms they're looking for in that area.
 Pragmatic considerations urge the use of reliable, convenient
 components that are toxic, and the reputations of the people
 associated with Mars missions have long been ruined: after all, just
 such components have been used in all the unmanned vehicles that have
 landed on the Martian surface. But it wouldn't be a bad idea to look
 for a nontoxic gas consisting of components that have a high boiling
 point (i.e., that are in liquid form at normal temperatures), are
 hypergolic (for purposes of reliability of operation of engines that
 cut-in tens, hundreds, or even thousands of times), and are
 sufficiently stable and shock-resistant. In theory, there is such a
 gas that comes close in terms of its characteristics to meeting those
 contradictory requirements: concentrated hydrogen peroxide and some
 kind of nontoxic hydrocarbon propellant with additives that ensure
 self-ignition with hydrogen peroxide. Additives to hydrogen peroxide
 (stabilizers) that will raise its stability still need to be found.
 214.  The lander must have equipment that is needed during the
 descent and during the mission's stay on the surface, but is not
 needed in the return from the surface to the orbiter: a forward heat
 shield used during the main deboost phase in the Martian atmosphere
 and jettisoned after the parachute system is triggered; the parachute
 system itself; a laboratory section for opera ons inside the craft
 on the Martian surface; electric-power generators (probably isotope
 generators); equipment for controlling the landing; a
 temperature-regulation system for the lander and the craft as a
 whole, which operates on the surface and includes heaters (probably
 isotope heaters) for the Martian night (as well as the Martian day);
 life-support system equipment and stocks (oxygen and water); an
 airlock and space suits for exiting the craft, with the necessary
 onboard equipment; systems for communications and television
 observation of the space outside; consoles and systems for displaying
 incoming information; a Mars rover that will enable rather extensive,
 long expeditions, with its own systems for things like electric power
 supply, life support, communications, and control and a system for
 temperature regulation; and research equipment (atmospheric probes,
 drilling units, analyzers, tthermostats, etc.).
 215.  Here the problem of the size of the laboratory section stands
 out-after all, the mission will have to work on the Martian surface
 for, maybe, several months. That means that dozens of cubic meters
 will be needed, plus individual cabins.
 216.  How many individuals will land on the surface of Mars?  It
 would be expected that work will be done at the landing site at the
 same time that work is being done on the Mars rover. So the mission
 UNCLASSIFIED
 C00175716
 Page: 39    of 86
 Concatenated JPRS Reports, 1991
 Document 5 of 10                                                 Page  32
 module crew will have to consist of four people (two per team, so
 they can back each other up). If we must keep things to a minimum,
 then we can restrict the crew to two people, who both work at the
 landing site and then both make trips on the Mars rover. But that
 doesn't seem very intelligent: to fly somewhere that's worlds away
 and then restrict ourselves to some minimum amount of activity.
 Besides, the danger inherent in such a scheme of things raises some
 doubts about it. Nov a compromise is under study: to have not one,
 but two Mars mission modules-one with a large laboratory section for
 work at the landing site, the other with the Mars rover. Their
 landings would be spaced in time, which would make it possible to use
 the second mission module to render assistance to the first if need
 be. And the crew of each would consist of two people.
 217.  The mission module would leave the Martian surface without the
 lander. In addition to a liftoff rocket system, the departing module
 would include a flight deck; gear for control, communications,
 telemetry, temperature control, and an electric power supply
 (probably based on chemical current sources, since autonomous flight
 without the lander won't be last long); life-support equipment for
 the crew; and a docking device.
 218.  The problem of communications between the mission module and
 the orbiter may prove to be a difficult one: only twice a day will
 the communications be what can barely be called--satlsfactory And-
 matters can be described as even more difficult when it comes to the
 need for communications between the mission module and the Mars rover
 when the rover is beyond the horizon. The problem can be solved by
 leaving the orbiter in a Mars-stationary orbit. The orbiter would be
 suspended in place over the surface of Mars, and its position could
 be over the landing site. Then, of course, there would be
 uninterrupted communications between the orbiter and the mission
 module and between the orbiter and the Mars rover and, consequently,
 between the mission module and the rover (through the orbiter).  Such
 a version coordinates pretty well with a profile that uses an orbiter
 with electric engines.
 219.  The flight deck for the mission module could be rather small
 for two people-3 or 4 sq meters.
 220.  For the orbiter and the associated problems involving injection
 into a trans-Mars trajectory and injection from a Mars satellite
 orbit into a trans-Earth trajectory, there is no definiteness like
 that associated with the mission module. On the stages of flight
 between Earth satellite orbit and insertion into a Mars satellite
 orbit, the orbiter would include the mission module. The profile for
 a Mars mission would then look like this:
 C00175716
 Page: 40    of 86
 Concatenated JPRS Reports, 1991
 Document 5 of 10                                                 Page  33
 221.  acceleration from a low, near-Earth orbit to a high, injection
 orbit (beyond the Earth's radiation belts), during which the
 spacecraft, without a crew, would take two or three months to move
 through the radiation belts (which is due to the low thrust
 capability of spacecraft with electric engines)
 222.  launch of the crew to the high, injection orbit by means of a
 special transport vehicle, rendezvous with the Mars mission orbiter,
 docking, transfer of the crew to the orbiter, separation of the
 transport vehicle
 223.  further acceleration of the orbiter to a trans-Mars trajectory
 with its electric engines
 224.  transfer to a Mars satellite orbit with its electric engines
 225.  waiting in orbit the return of the mission module
 226.  injection from Mars satellite orbit into a trans-Earth
 trajectory
 227.  direct descent of the mission crew to Earth and injection of
 the orbiter without the crew into a near-Earth orbit, again with the
 electric engines.
 228.  That profile involves large expenditures of energy, since with
 acceleration and braking during exit from planetary satellite orbit
 or insertion into satellite orbit at low thrust, the velocity
 characterizing the energy expenditure almost doubles. That is why if
 the use of typical chemical-fuel rocket engines with a thrust
 capability of around unity yields a total characteristic velocity of
 4.5-7.3 km/s (including the energy spent for exit from Earth
 satellite orbit), then the use of electric engines produces a
 velocity of 9-14 km/s (depending on how good the injection dates are
 and what the Mars satellite orbit parameters are). In and of itself,
 that's not strange at all: the high velocity of the exhaust jet
 compensates for that drawback. Electric engines can produce an
 exhaust velocity of around 50,000-100,000 m/s instead of the 4600 m/s
 of even liquid-fuel oxygen-hydrogen engines. That is why the fuel
 needed for those operations is 9-24 percent of departure mass in
 Earth satellite orbit for a spacecraft with electric engines, but
 63-80 percent for a complex with liquid-fuel rocket stages. In that
 context, one can see the very important advantage of electric
 engines: an increase in the final mass of the spacecraft (or in the
 mass of the Mars mission module) has little effect on an increase in
 the departure mass or, consequently, on the overall complexity of the
 undertaking in the process of its development and creation.
 C00175716
 Page: 41    of 86
 Concatenated JPRS Reports, 1991
 Document 5 of 10                                                 Page  34
 229.  On the other hand, a spacecraft with electric engines has
 fundamental drawbacks: little experience has been garnered in
 long-duration operation of such engines, the spacecraft must have a
 powerful energy-supply system on board, and the service life of an
 electric engine is in the thousands of hours.
 230.  A departure mass of around 250-300 tons for a complex would
 require that a 7-10 MW electric power plant weighing around 70-100
 tons be carried aboard the spacecraft.
 231.  Nuclear electric power plants have usually been considered, and
 added to the all the complications is the problem of providing
 radiation protection for the spacecraft crew and equipment at an
 acceptable mass. The problem is complicated by the fact that it must
 be solved not only for the flight of the complex as a whole (when the
 crew compartments and the section for the nuclear reactor do not move
 in relation to each other and, consequently, protection can be
 confined to the shadow shielding), but also for legs during which the
 mission module is departing from the orbiter and approaching it.
 232.  A spacecraft with a nuclear electric power plant and electric
 engines could take the form of a number of components located one
 behind the other along the spacecraft's longitudinal axis: the
 nuclear power plant, which includes the reactor and the shadow
 shielding that screens the rest of the structure and a ivin-g-- ---
 quarters from power plant radiation; the electric engines, with the
 propellant-feed system; the propellant tank; the trussvork connecting
 the nuclear power plant and the spacecraft compartments; the nuclear
 power plant temperature-regulation system radiator for the removal of
 heat unused in the converters that convert the heat produced by the
 reactor into electrical energy (geometrically, this is the largest
 part of the spacecraft); the compartments of the orbiter; the reentry
 vehicle used in the return to Earth; and the mission module.
 233.  Such a configuration for a Mars mission offers the advantage of
 the complex being extended along the longitudinal axis and the center
 of mass located in the vicinity of the connecting trusswork, and it
 would be relatively simple to produce artificial gravity in the crew
 compartments by rotating the complex around the axis perpendicular to
 the longitudinal axis (if artificial gravity were judged advisable
 for the crew of the Mars mission, which could last two or three
 years).
 234.  The problems associated with the power plant could change
 substantially if solar panels were used instead of a nuclear power
 plant. Solar panels with a total area of around 10,000 sq meters
 would be needed for an output of 7-10 MW. Solar panels could compete
 with a nuclear power plant only if the mass of the trusswork and the
 C00175716
 Page: 42    of 86
 Concatenated JPRS Reports, 1991
 Document 5 of 10                                                 Page  35
 solar cells themselves did not exceed 7-10 kg per kilowatt of derived
 electrical energy. That could be achieved if film-type solar panels
 with a mass of 100-200 g/m<sup>2<reset> and an efficiency of around
 5-7 percent were created. Thus, film-type solar panels could become
 necessary for the Mars mission, for orbiting solar electric power
 plants, and for orbiting factories. Developing such panels is an
 urgent task for modern technology.
 235.  For a Mars mission that uses chemical-propellant jet engines
 only, choosing a mission profile that is optimal in terms of power
 needs is essential.
 236.  Such a profile would consist of the following:
 237.  injection of mission spacecraft into a low, near-Earth,
 assembly orbit, and use of transport craft to deliver the crew to the
 complex of mission spacecraft
 238.  injection of hydrogen-oxygen booster rocket (designed for the
 sole purpose of injecting the mission spacecraft into a trans-Mars
 trajectory) into the assembly orbit, and docking with the mission
 spacecraft
 239.  departure for Mars (with undocking of the booster rocket after
 its work is finished) at the most optimal--d-a-te such- -thar--the esoape
 velocity from near-Earth orbit is 3.7-4.0 km/s
 240.  insertion into a severely elongated elliptical Mars satellite
 orbit with virtually no fuel expense, as a result of braking of the
 spacecraft in the Martian atmosphere (during the motion in the
 atmosphere, the spacecraft must be protected from heat by a
 heat-protection shield)
 241.  separation of the mission module, its descent, operations on
 the surface, return of the module to orbit, rendezvous and docking
 with the orbiter, transfer of the mission module crew to the orbiter,
 separation of the mission module
 242.  injection of the orbiter from Mars satellite orbit into a
 trans-Earth trajectory with the sustainer engine of the orbiter's
 consolidated propulsion system
 243.  upon approach to Earth, transfer of crew to reentry vehicle,
 reentry at escape velocity, and touchdown.
 244.  The following figures can give us something of an idea of the
 overall size of the complex: with the total mass of the orbiter and
 the mission module and their propulsion systems and fuel at around
 C00175716
 Page: 43    of 86
 Concatenated JPRS Reports, 1991
 Document 5 of 10                                                Page  36
 120 tons, the mass of the complex can be around 300 tons.
 245.  If the mission crew that lands on Mars consists of four
 individuals, then the total number of crew members for the Mars
 mission must be at least six.
 246.  The orbiter's onboard systems and computers must support
 in-flight operations such as control and navigation and
 communications with Earth, the mission module, and the Mars rover
 (via the orbiter).
 247.  Because of the need to minimize the mass of the spacecraft and
 because of the long duration of the flight, a closed-loop
 oxygen-and-water system will have to be used for life support.
 248.  The long flight of the mission far from Earth, with no
 possibility of giving any direct assistance to the cosmonauts, raises
 the question of whether the mission should consist of several
 spacecraft, who could provide such assistance to one another and, at
 the same time, avoid duplicating programs of operations.
 249.  A Base in Geostationary Orbit
 250.  A base in geostationary orbit could be used for servicing
 unmanned geostationary platforms, communlcationg-and--television relay -
 satellites, and weather satellites that are in geostationary orbit;
 for observing the Earth's surface in the interests of the
 environmental monitoring and natural resources studies; for weather
 observations and astrophysical research; and for the construction of
 solar electric power plants.
 251.  The creation of a base in geostationary orbit does not appear
 today to be an essential task, but the development of communications
 and television-relay systems and the appearance of multipurpose
 platforms in geostationary orbit could lead to the conclusion in the
 future that a base in geostationary orbit is needed. The rest
 (communications, television, radio telescopes, etc.)  represents
 incidental goals: if a base were to be created, then it would be
 logical to use it for other purposes, too.
 252.  The base could include an orbital unit; an external platform; a
 fueling station; and an orbital transport vehicle for carrying
 cosmonauts and cargo to vehicles and platforms being serviced.
 253.  In addition, the base could also include a manned transport
 spacecraft (for bringing crews to and from the base) and multipurpose
 cargo transport spacecraft (for delivering cargoes from low orbit to
 the base).
 C00175716
 Page: 44    of 86
 Concatenated JPRS Reports, 1991
 Document 5 of 10                                                Page  37
 254.  Based on a cost of $5,000/kg to put a payload into low orbit,
 using today's expendable orbital-injection systems would put the cost
 of sending a spacecraft weighing approximately seven tons (which
 includes the mass of the propulsion system and fuel needed for a
 return to Earth) to the base at around $250-350 million, depending on
 the launch vehicle used, the orbital plane of injection to the
 intermediate orbit, and the components used in the rocket stage for
 transferring the spacecraft from intermediate orbit to geostationary
 orbit.  That's a lot. So we need to aim for as small a crew as
 possible on the station and for a rather long tour of duty.  We can
 tentatively expect a base crew of three cosmonauts who serve a tour
 of duty of one year.
 255.  A base in geostationary orbit could be configured as a unitized
 structure, like the Mir station and the Freedom station project, or
 as a cloud-station, and it would consist of individual modules: an
 orbital unit with a platform (making up the main module) and a
 fueling station. In a cloud-station version, the fueling station
 would drift at a distance of 10-50 km away from the main module.
 256.  The orbital unit would have to have at least three docking
 ports-one for a manned spacecraft, a second for a cargo spacecraft,
 and the third for a backup spacecraft. All the inside facilities
 could easily be fitted in a space of 150=Zf0 c u meters (-a cyl n e
 about 4 m across and 12-15 m long).
 257.  The inside gear for control and communications would include
 onboard computers; gyroscopic sensors and accelerometers; the radar
 receivers and responders used when spacecraft rendezvous with the
 orbital unit; gear for communications with Earth (direct and through
 relay satellites), with the transport vehicle, with cosmonauts doing
 EVAs, with the radio telescope, and with the fueling station; gear
 for processing telemetry; consoles; manual controls; instrument
 panels; displays; screens for displaying incoming information; and
 television gear.
 258.  In light of the cost of cargo deliveries, we would rely on a
 system that is completely closed-loop for water and oxygen and that
 uses for its functioning expendable materials in the form of
 equipment components that are replaceable in the process of
 operation. Dehydrated food, plus underwear and clothing, would be
 delivered by cargo spacecraft. The mass of those materials would be
 on the order of two-three tons a year in the context of an expected
 total freight traffic volume to the base of about 15-20 tons a year
 (remember that the freight traffic volume to the Mir station is 10-15
 tons a year). Most of the cargo would consist of things like
 equipment for regular operations, instruments and assemblies needing
 C00175716
 Page: 45    of 86
 Concatenated JPRS Reports, 1991
 Document 5 of 10                                                Page  38
 replacement, new scientific gear, and fuel.
 259.  On the outside of the orbital unit would be the platform, the
 propulsion system, the solar panels, the temperature-regulation
 system radiator, the optical sensors for the attitude control system
 of the orbital unit and the solar panels, antennas, and the powered
 gyroscopes of the attitude control system. Powered gyroscopes are
 used because, on the one hand, the orbital unit's communication
 antennas are always pointed toward Earth (i.e., in practical terms,
 attitude needs to be merely maintained) and because, on the other, an
 attitude control system that uses no fuel is needed (for the same
 efficiency considerations associated with expendable materials
 delivered from Earth). The location of the powered gyroscopes outside
 the pressurized spaces stems not only from the fact that the
 flywheels must rotate in a vacuum (in order to avoid windage losses),
 but also-and this is the main reason-from the consideration that a
 noise source be removed from the pressurized spaces.
 260.  The platform is a trusswork structure that supports the
 directional communication and relay antennas and the optical
 instruments that are operating in different spectral ranges and are
 used for observing the Earth's surface and the atmosphere.
 261.  The propulsion system is needed for placing the based in the
 desired region in geostationary orbit and-for-moving-it-to another-
 region if the need arises. In addition, it can be used for keeping a
 cloud-base from "racing apart" in the event that the system for
 maintaining a given position relative to the main module goes out of
 order.  Accordingly, the propulsion system includes a vernier engine,
 thrusters for control and coordinate shifts of the base with fuel,
 fuel-tank pressurization tanks, and pneumohydraulic valves. As fuel
 components, a gas such as dimethylhydrazine-nitrogen tetroxide would,
 of course, be used.
 262.  In a cloud-base, the fueling station would be an independent,
 unmanned space vehicle. For that reason, it would have to have a
 complete set of servo systems to support its existence: attitude
 control and stabilization systems (including a radar for rangefinding
 and measuring the radial velocity relative to the main module of the
 base, plus powered gyroscopes as controlling organs); a
 communications system; a temperature-regulation system; a
 power-supply system; life-support systems that are switched on when
 cosmonauts visit the fueling station; and a propulsion system.
 263.  The vehicle for making trips between the service facilities of
 the base would be an orbital craft capable of both manned and
 unmanned operation. In the unmanned mode, the craft could be used for
 simple service operations-such as fueling operations. For operations
 Page: 46    of 86
 Concatenated JPRS Reports, 1991
 Document 5 of 10                                                 Page  39
 of greater complexity that are associated with the replacement or
 repair of instruments and equipment, a crew would be sent on the
 craft. Since the service craft has no reentry capsule, it would
 consist of gear for control and communications, a power-supply unit
 based on solar panels, temperature-regulation and life-support
 systems, a propulsion system with a sustainer engine and steering
 engines, and a docking assembly. In addition, it must have systems
 for fueling the vehicle it is servicing: fuel-component tanks,
 pressurization tanks, a compressor (for pumping the pressurization
 gas out of the tanks of the propulsion system being fueled into its
 pressurization tanks), and automatic pneumohydraulic equipment.
 Naturally, the vehicles that are "clients" of the base in
 geostationary orbit will have to have standardized fuel components
 and pneumohydraulic systems for their propulsion systems (if only for
 fueling and safety), as well as docking assemblies.
 264.  The manned transport spacecraft can consist of three
 components: the reentry vehicle, the equipment section with a
 retropropulsion system, and a booster-rocket stage.
 265.  The reentry vehicle would hold the crew, equipment needed for
 the return leg to Earth, and the control gear and organs needed by
 the crew during the flight. The reentry vehicle has a heat shield.
 266.  The equipment section hold the following: control and
 communications gear; electric power-supply and temperature-regulation
 systems; life-support system backups; and the retropropulsion system.
 The retropropulsion system is designed to issue a braking impulse
 that ensures transfer from geostationary orbit to an elliptial orbit
 for return to Earth (during reentry in the equatorial plane, the
 required change in velocity is about 1.5 km/s); to adjust the
 trajectory of motion; and to effect control of attitude and
 coordinate shifts during rendezvous and docking. Since the propulsion
 system must remain ready for operation a long time (the manned
 spacecraft is expected to remain "on duty" as part of the base for
 the entire time that the crew it delivered remains on the base), it
 quite naturally uses high-boiling-point, hypergolic components.
 267.  The booster-rocket stage must lift the spacecraft from a low,
 near-Earth orbit to an elliptical transfer orbit (when operating in
 the equatorial plane, the required increase in velocity is about 2.5
 km/s), and then, at its apogee, it must insert the spacecraft into a
 geostationary orbit (in the equatorial plane, the required increase
 in velocity this time is about 1.5 km/s). Four kilometers a second
 represents immense power needs. For that reason, it seems sensible to
 use oxygen and hydrogen as components in the booster-rocket stage.
 For a version so efficient, in terms of power, we can estimate the
 departure mass of that craft in low, near-Earth orbit to be on the
 C00175716
 UNCLASSIFIED
 Page: 47    of 86
 Concatenated JPRS Reports, 1991
 Document 5 of 10                                                Page  40
 order of 50 tons. If we assume the cost of manufacturing the craft to
 be around $50 million and the cost of placing a payload into orbit to
 be $5,000/kg (half as expensive as putting a payload in orbit from
 the Shuttle), then for an expendable spacecraft we get a figure of
 around'$300 million in expense for each crew change on a base in
 geostationary orbit.
 268.  Could we cut the costs of a crew change by developing and using
 a reusable manned transport spacecraft for the flights from the low
 intermediate orbit to the geostationary orbit and back?
 269.  Such a spacecraft could be seen as consisting of the crew
 flight deck, the equipment section with the retropropulsion system
 (which operates on high-boiling-point components), a booster-rocket
 stage that burns oxygen and hydrogen, and an aerodynamic shield that
 plays the simultaneous role of speed brake and heat shield.
 270.  Such a reusable spacecraft, without any recovery capsule, could
 operate in the following profile:
 271.  the retropropulsion system of a reusable spacecraft that is
 docked with a low-orbit servicing station is fueled with
 high-boiling-point propellant components
 272.  the next shift of cosmonauts lifts off-from-Earth iri a
 transport spacecraft that travels between Earth and the low-orbit
 servicing station and that performs a rendezvous and docking with the
 station
 273.  the reusable spacecraft is fueled with liquid oxygen and liquid
 hydrogen, and the cosmonauts transfer to the reusable spacecraft,
 274.  the reusable spacecraft separates from the servicing station,
 the engine of its booster stage is switched on, and it transfers to
 an elliptical orbit of flight for the geostationary orbit
 275.  at the apogee of the elliptical orbit, the engine of the
 booster stage cuts-in again, and the spacecraft transfers to
 geostationary orbit near the base
 276.  the spacecraft performs a rendezvous and docking with the
 orbital unit of the base by using its retropropulsion system
 277.  the crew transfers to the orbital unit of the base and begins
 its work.
 278.  When the crew finishes its tour of duty six months or a year
 later, it transfers to the reusable spacecraft, which separates from
 C00175716
 Page: 48    of 86
 Concatenated JPRS Reports, 1991
 Document 5 of 10                                                 Page  41
 the orbital unit of the base. The retrorocket is switched on, and the
 spacecraft is inserted into an elliptical orbit of descent.
 279.  Then the following happens:
 280.  the elliptical orbit is corrected so that the reusable
 spacecraft enters the necessary altitude corridor for atmospheric
 braking
 281.  the spacecraft makes reentry, and its control system controls
 its motion in the atmosphere via the aerodynamic lift of the speed
 brake in such a way that after braking and reentry, the apogee of the
 result orbit is roughly equal to the altitude of the orbit of the
 servicing station
 282.  when the spacecraft approaches the apogee of the resultant
 orbit, the propulsion system is switched on, and the perigee of the
 orbit of the spacecraft is raised to the altitude of the orbit of the
 servicing station
 283.  the spacecraft makes a rendezvous and docking with the
 servicing station
 284.  the crew transfers to the transport spacecraft that travels
 between Earth and that orbit, and the reusable spacecraft is readied
 at the servicing station for the next trip.
 285.  If we assume that same cost of delivering fuel to the orbital
 station ($5,000/kg), then the transfer to the reusable spacecraft
 could cut the costs for a crew change on the geostationary base by
 roughly half. But we must still consider the expenses incurred by the
 flight of the manned transport craft that travels between Earth and
 orbit and the costs of operating the low-orbit servicing station,
 which will be placed among the costs of operating the reusable
 spacecraft. So the gain may turn out to be not so substantial.
 286.  Nevertheless, the future is probably still with reusable
 systems. We need to go with them. A substantial cut in transportation
 costs, however, can be achieved only through consistent use of the
 principle of reusability and only through the creation of a truly
 efficient reusable transport system that can deliver cargoes to low,
 near-Earth orbit at a cost of around $100/kg.
 287.  As already mentioned, around 20 tons of freight will have to be
 delivered to a base in geostationary orbit every year. Hauling up
 that much with expendable cargo craft would cost roughly $500 million
 (assuming operations are in the plane of the equator). For that
 reason, we need to analyze the advisability of developing a reusable
 C00175716
 Page: 49    of 86
 Concatenated JPRS Reports, 1991
 Document 5 of 10                                                 Page  42
 cargo spacecraft.
 288.  Such a craft would take the form of a reusable tow craft with
 electric engines that receive the electrical energy for their
 operation from solar panels. With a tow craft mass of about 30 tons,
 and about 10-12 tons of that being fuel, the tow craft could deliver
 10 tons of cargo to a base in geostationary orbit,'i.e., it would use
 about a kilogram of its fuel for each kilogram of payload. Thus, the
 delivery of 20 tons of cargo to a base in geostationary orbit would
 cost $200-250 million (even if the cost of putting the cargo into
 low, near-Earth orbit were assumed to be $5,000/kg). Such a tow
 craft, of course, would have a big drawback: the slowness of the
 delivery of cargo, since its flight from low orbit to geostationary
 orbit would take several months.
 289.  For that very reason, and because the craft would be long in
 the radiation belts, spacecraft with electric engines will hardly be
 used to delivery crews to bases in geostationary orbit (a crew would
 have to sit in the small space of a radiation shelter for two months
 during the flight).
 290.  Space Settlements
 291.  The Earth is overpopulated. The ecological problems that have
 risen up before mankind at the end-of our century are the result of
 not only the irresponsible waste of natural resources and imprudent
 industrial and agricultural practices, but also the fact that there
 are already too many people on Earth. Maybe that's why the old idea
 of resettling people in space is again beginning to attract
 attention. Since the 1970s, suggestions have been appearing on the
 creation of space settlements.
 292.  One of the most brilliant projects belongs to J. O'Haley.  He
 and a group of enthusiasts have developed and proposed several types
 of space settlements that differ in size and whose populations range
 from 10,000 to 20 million. In the latter case, the settlement
 consists of two parallel cylinders joined by a frame; each cylinder
 is 6.4 km across and 12 km long. The cylinders are rotated about
 their axes at a rate of 0.53 rpm, which produces a centrifugal
 acceleration on the inner surface, which is inhabited by the people
 of the settlement, and that acceleration is equal to the normal
 acceleration of the force of gravity on the Earth's surface.
 293.  The cylinders rotate in opposite directions to compensate for
 their angular momentum, so it won't interfere with the orientation of
 the settlement. The axes of the cylinders point to the Sun. Part of
 the wall (roughly half) is transparent, and offset, cylindrical
 mirrors direct the light from the Sun into the cylinders. The length
 C00175716
 Page: 50    of 86
 Concatenated JPRS Reports, 1991
 Document 5 of 10                                                Page  43
 of the mirrors is equal to the length of the cylinder, and the width
 corresponds to the width of "windows." Energy is supplied to the
 population from thermoelectric power plants that get their energy
 from the Sun via two parabolic mirrors on the ends of the cylinders
 opposite the Sun. The ends of the cylinders on the Sun side have
 docking positions for spacecraft.
 294.  Inside the cylinders is a normal terrestrial atmosphere.  Main
 transportation arteries are laid out on the inner surface of the
 cylinders, and on that surface is also housing, factories, public
 buildings, stores, etc. All that is, as it were, beneath one hilly
 roof (the roof is toward the axis of the cylinder- "up" for the
 inhabitants is toward the axis of the cylinder). The roof is covered
 with soil, and growing on it are trees and grass, on which
 agricultural operations are performed; strolling lanes have also been
 laid out, and there are ponds and lakes. In a word, a terrestrial
 landscape is reproduced above the living and industrial facilities.
 The settlement has a closed-loop life cycle that uses biological as
 well as chemical-mechanical methods. Construction materials, raw
 materials, nitrogen, carbon, and hydrogen are brought in from Earth,
 the Moon, the asteroids, etc. The population density is on the order
 of 30,000 people per square kilometer, which is roughly three times
 higher than the population density in Moscow. Thus, each cylinder is
 a city like New York or Moscow, with a population of 10 million, but
 where virtually all the housing and all tTie--inTustriaibutldings-have-
 been moved so they are under the ground.
 295.  The mass of a settlement is around 10-15 billion tons, which
 immediately brings up the question, Where do you get such a huge
 amount of construction materials?  Those to whom the idea belongs
 suggest getting the materials from the Moon. That suggestion is tied
 to some extent to the location of the settlement. They suggest that
 it be located at the fourth or fifth Lagrangian point in the
 Earth-Moon system, each of which is located on the Moon's orbit
 equidistant from the Earth and the Moon.  Lagrange shoved that a body
 located at one of those points will maintain a stable position in the
 Earth-Moon system. That feature of the Lagrangian points could,
 according to the thinking of O'Haley and his group, make delivery of
 materials from the Moon to the construction site somewhat easier.
 296.  Extraction, delivery, and processing of the materials is
 described by the group in the following manner. A highly automated
 mining and ore-dressing industry is set up on the Moon. Ore-bearing
 rock is processed to the needed condition and then poured into
 standard "buckets," which go to an electromagnetic catapult. Since
 there is no atmosphere on the Moon, all the acceleration takes place
 at the Moon's surface. A linear synchronous electric motor (which is
 the catapult) accelerates the buckets containing the rock to the
 C00175716
 UNCLASSIFIED
 Page: 51    of 86
 Concatenated JPRS Reports, 1991
 Document 5 of 10                                                 Page  44
 proper velocity, and then the deceleration mode is switched on. The
 buckets are open in the direction of motion, and for that reason,
 when the motor is switched to a deceleration mode, the prepared rock
 flies out in the direction of the acceleration. The direction and
 speed are chosen such that the rock "flies" to the second
 Lagrangian point (which is located on a line between the Earth and
 the Moon, opposite the Earth). There the rock is collected by
 "interceptors," and on freighter spacecraft that are powered by
 electric engines it is taken to the construction site. Back on the
 Moon, the motor slows the buckets to virtually zero velocity, and
 they are dispatched for the next load, and the next cycle of
 acceleration begins.
 297.  Based on a 15-year construction period, nearly 1 billion tons
 of processed rock a year (30 tons a second in continuous "tossing")
 must be sent from the Moon. And if we want to stabilize the Earth's
 population with a continuous emigration of the excess population to
 space, then an excess of 50 million people a year would require that
 nearly 40 billion tons of rock a year (that's 1,300 tons a second!)
 be dispatched from the Moon. But that is considerably more than
 everything that is being mined right now on Earth.
 298.  Warehouses for raw materials, semifinished products, and
 finished products would have to be built at the construction site, in
 the. vacuum, as would plants for things like ore dressing and metallurgy. The productivity of that industrial country in space (the
 whole operation is get "housing" up in time for the growing
 humanity) would have to be on the order of 30-40 billion tons of
 product a year: that is roughly equivalent to what the industry of
 the entire Earth is capable of processing and producing.
 299.  Another project under the name of the "Stanford Torus" (it
 was developed at Stanford University, in the United States) proposes
 building space settlements in the shape of tori 1.6 km across, with a
 cross-section diameter of about 150 m. In practical terms, such a
 settlement, designed for 10,000 people, is a densely developed city
 in the form of one closed street with a solid wall of homes and
 buildings on each side.
 300.  The torus rotates around its axis of symmetry to produce
 gravity for its inhabitants. A mirror hovering over the torus (with a
 diameter roughly equal to the diameter of the torus) reflects the
 Sun's rays onto a circular mirror that is rotating along with the
 torus, and that mirror directs the light through round "windows"
 into the torus.
 301.  Along the axis of the torus are equipment, docking positions,
 and industry. The air pressure in the torus is 0.5 atm, with a
 COO 175716
 Page: 52    of 86
 Concatenated JPRS Reports, 1991
 Document 5 of 10                                                Page  45
 partial oxygen pressure that is normal for Earth.
 302.  Because of the smaller dimensions in terms of the "height"
 and "width" of the habitable space, the mass of the structure of
 the settlement in this project is roughly an order of magnitude
 smaller, but then the amount of space per person is also an order of
 magnitude smaller.  But even in this version, it's easy to see that
 the creation of space settlements cannot be a means of solving the
 problem of the overpopulation of the Earth. In theory, one could
 imagine such grandiose operations as being feasible if mankind were
 to somehow acquire enough robot-entities that were specially created
 for living and working in space, were absolutely efficient (and
 always had a strong desire to work), could themselves design and
 build whatever they wanted and wherever (like genies), and still
 would take orders from poeple and would obediently carry those orders
 out.
 303.  But even if such settlements were built, would people want to
 live there? Live your whole life in a can. So what if it's a very big
 can, 150 meters in diameter! That's something for the psychologists.
 We might be able to think up some "tin" idea, but for Pete's sake
 it sure wouldn't hold up forever.
 304.  Space settlements for tourists along the lines of a Las Vegas
 in space-now that's something one might imagine  and-such settlements -
 might just spring up.
 305.  So it's unlikely that space settlements would save us from
 ecological disaster or overpopulation of the Earth. Mankind must
 someday grow up, and stop reveling in its fertility. Not by
 strong-arm methods or restrictive legislation, but by understanding
 the current circumstance must mankind as a whole and each individual
 separately arrive at the clear solution: we must put a stop to the
 growth of the human population. A natural ethical norm must be
 affirmed in people's awareness-that no woman should have more than
 two children. If all people were to adhere to that norm, the
 population growth would cease, and we would have a real chance of
 averting ecological disaster on Earth.
 306.  Flight to the Stars
 307.  Almost since the days when space program was taking its very
 first steps, it has been clear that anything within the solar system
 is reachable by the space vehicles or spacecraft that could be
 developed with the level of technology available and that,
 consequently, even if humans couldn't land on all its planets, they
 could at least make it to them. But at the same'time, it has also
 become clear that here at home, in the solar system, we probably
 C00175716
 Page: 53    of 86
 Concatenated JPRS Reports, 1991
 Document 5 of 10                                           Page  46
 won't find anything unusual. It's unlikely that, with the data we
 produce on our trips about our solar system, we will be able to move
 very far forward in our understanding of the physical picture of the
 world in which we live.
 308.  That means we need to look to the stars, and starships.  What
 kinds of problems need to be solved before star missions can become a
 reality?
 309.  The first problem is time. Even if we could build a starship
 that could fly at a speed close to the speed of light (say, at a
 speed on the order of 70 percent the speed of light), travel in our
 galaxy would take thousands or even tens of thousands of years,
 because the diameter of the galaxy is nearly 100,000 light years.
 310. 'At the end of a journey, what would be left even of cosmonauts
 who had been "frozen"? What would be left of embryos? And do we
 have a right to decide the fate of people who haven't even been born
 yet? And even if we could solve that problem, the travelers would
 come back to a world totally foreign to them. A flight to the stars
 wouldn't be merely a trip, it would be a flight to another life. For
 those around you, your relatives and friends, it would be something
 akin to your suicide.
 311.  The second problem involves dangerous streams o gas and dust.
 Interstellar space is not empty. Remnants of gas and dust, streams of
 particles, are everywhere. For a starship traveling at a speed close
 to the speed of light, those gas and dust remnants create a
 high-energy stream that would act upon the ship and against which
 there would be virtually no protection.
 312.  That stream would result in the vaporization of any protective
 shield and in unacceptably high radiation dose levels.
 313.  The third problem involves power needs. If a ship's rocket
 engine were to use the most efficient thermonuclear reaction and the
 ship were to have the ideal design, a roundtrip at a speed of near
 the speed of light would require that the ratio of initial mass to
 final mass be no worse than 10<sup>30<reset>, which is unrealistic.
 314.  And as for the creation of a photon engine for the starship,
 which would be based on the use of annihiliation of matter, certain
 problems are evident, but their solutions are not. Nevertheless,
 .let's try to imagine a galactic, photon-powered ship capable of
 flying at a speed rather near the speed of light, which would remove
 the problem of time. The time itself that it would take for
 cosmonauts to fly roundtrip on a journey covering a distance equal to
 about half the diameter of our galaxy- assuming an optimal timetable
 C00175716
 Page: 54    of 86
 Concatenated JPRS Reports, 1991
 Document 5 of 10                                                Page  47
 for the flight (continuous acceleration, and then continuous
 deceleration)-would be 42 years (by the ship's clock). By the clock
 on Earth, 100,000 years would pass.
 315.  Let's assume that we managed to produce an ideal process in a
 photon engine and create an ideal design for tanks with zero mass
 (that's impossible, of course, but that only means that, in fact, the
 results would be considerably worse), and let's try to analyze
 certain parameters of such an ideal craft.
 316.  The initial-to-final-mass ratio would be 7 x 10<sup>18<reset>.
 That means that if the mass for the living quarters and the working
 areas and equipment (i.e., everything that the spacecraft carries)
 were a total of 100 tons, then the departure mass would be
 10<sup>21<reset> tons. That's more than the mass of the Moon. Half of
 that mass would be antimatter.
 317.  In order to ensure acceleration equal to g, the engine would
 have to develop a thrust equal to 10<sup>24<reset> kgf. To produce
 that kind of thrust in the focus of the mirror of a photon engine,
 there would have to be an emission source (whose operation is based
 on the annihilation reaction) of around 10<sup>40<reset> erg/s.
 Remember that the emissive power of our Sun is on the order of 4 x
 10<sup>33<reset> erg/s. Thus, in the focus of the mirror of the
 photon engine, we would need to ignite-millions o-f-Suns-T---
 318.                  The parameters of a photon-powered ship would be considerably
 better is it were possible to build a hypothetical ship with a ramjet
 photon engine that carried only antimatter. But the analysis would
 show there, too, the need to achieve impossible results-in the focus
 of the mirror of even that engine, we would need to ignite hundreds
 of Suns. And with all that, there still remain the problems of time
 and protection from streams of gas and dust.
 319.  Based on today's notions of the world, we are left with the
 impression that we cannot solve the problem of transporting material
 bodies galactic distances at speeds close to the speed of light.
 Apparently, there's no point in charging through space and time in a
 mechanical structure.
 320.  We need to find a means of interstellar travel that does not
 involve the need to transport a material body. In doing so, we
 approach an idea long used in science fiction (which need not be
 embarrassing, because profound ideas have more than once been
 expressed in science fiction literature) about the travel of
 intelligent beings in the form of information packages.
 321.  Electromagnetic waves propagate throughout the entire
 C00175716
 Page: 55    of 86
 Concatenated JPRS Reports, 1991
 Document 5 of 10                                                Page  48
 observable Universe with virtually no loss. And that may be the key
 to interstellar flights. If we want to stay away from mysticism, we
 must acknowledge that the person of today's "organic" man cannot be
 separated from his body. But we could imagine a specially engineered
 individual whose person could be separated from the body in a manner
 somewhat similar the software that can be removed from the structure
 of today's computers.
 322.  If an information package that is a complete description of his
 person, his individuality, could be copied from his fields of
 foreground operations and memories, then that package could also be
 sent by radiolink to a receiving station and copied into a standard
 material carrier (or a carrier chosen by price, or...)- in which the
 traveler could live, act, and satisfy his own curiosity.
 323.  During the transmission of that package of information, the
 individual would not be alive. In order for him to be alive, his
 person-his package of information-would have to be in a material
 carrier. His person, or, if you will, his spirit, could exist only on
 material fields of operation and memory.
 324.  Such a means of handling the problem of flying to the stars
 could be behind the plots not only of modern science fiction, but
 also of ancient worlds, fairy tales, and legends about ascensions
 into the heavens and condemnations to hell, abou  flying saucers-and-
 worlds where people appear and then disappear, about transmigration
 of the soul. It could be the resolution of philosophical arguments
 and discussions about the essence of man, the frailty of this
 corporeal shell, and the essence of being.  What is man? 'What is
 truth?
 325.  It is interesting what outstanding philosophers from different
 times have, through logical analysis (not based on knowledge), come
 to the thoroughly modern notion of the relationship between essence
 and the human body.  The life of man is the life of his soul; it is
 the thought that beats in feebleness about oneself ("Who am I?")
 and about the world outside oneself and inside; it is the esthetic
 enjoyment of beauty and the rejection of the primitive and the
 untruth; it is the freedom of thought and analysis. We are here, we
 are living, and we are capable of reflecting on, evaluating, and
 reprocessing information and generating it. The rest of me, my body,
 is for service.
 326.  The brain is a field of mathematical operations on symbols,
 numbers, concepts, laws, and algorithms.  Those operations ensure the
 integration of incoming information and its analysis. The algorithms
 that have come about in man for processing, analyzing, and evaluating
 information determine his esthetics and self-image, and they
 C00175716
 Page: 56    of 86
 Concatenated JPRS Reports, 1991
 Document 5 of 10                                                Page  49
 determined his sense of his own existence. Of course, those
 operations are performed according to laws that are specific to a
 given individual.   Those laws form in the brain of an individual
 gradually (as a result of his experience in gaining and reprocessing
 information and his experience in his own activity and the evaluation
 of it), and they are recorded on the fields of mathematical
 operations and the memory units of his brain. Over the course of his
 life, those laws may be improved, they may be changed (just as man
 changes over the course of his life), and they may deteriorate.
 Recorded on a material carrier, they become, as it were, material.
 But the operations themselves, our thoughts, our experiences-they're
 not something that is tangible.  Throughout all time, man has tried
 to materialize those "intangibles" in the form of sounds, words,
 stories, manuscripts, and books. But they have always been only
 shadows, weak reflections of those "intangibles."
 327.  The overwhelming majority of people-almost all and almost
 always-have not made the distinction between their "I" and their
 "body." And it is the body that they have always tried to make
 things a little better for. And in general, that's necessary: without
 nutrition, the brain dies, the field of operations decomposes, the
 person disappears. At the same time, in a healthy body, the
 "computer" works with fewer breakdowns and with greater speed
 (because of simultaneous operations and because of better algorithms
 in general), and the interior is greatly resistant to external
 threats and complications.  And the most important thing is that a
 healthy body means clear thinking.
 328.  Maybe that's why the striving to makes things a little better
 for the body from generation to generation has remained the main
 driving force of the human race. It has also resulted in predatory
 campaigns, the creation of new technologies, and the striving for a
 better organized life for society (including by means of "Let's rob
 from the rich," which is camouflaged by "Down with exploitation").
 Homes, cars, airplanes, gas and electricity, and computers were all
 born out of that striving. A striving to make things a little better
 for the body has been and remains the prime mover in people's lives.
 329.  But in fact, all that is secondary. Our  III,"  our
 individuality, our essence, our being-that's not our material shell.
 There's nothing that contradicts our perception of the world in the
 thought that it is fundamentally possible to separate individuality
 and its material carrier.
 330.  For that reason, from an engineering standpoint, it is possible
 to engineer an individual whose spirit could be "separated" from
 his body, and a world could be engineered in which the individual
 could move almost instantaneously (in the the solar system, for
 C00175716
 Page: 57    of 86
 Concatenated JPRS Reports, 1991
 Document 5 of 10                                                  Page  50
 example) from one planet to another.
 331.  Would it be okay to create such a being? Do we have the right
 to do that? What incentives could we inculcate in him? It is those
 very questions that describe the main problem. Things are different
 with us, probably the product of organic evolution. The instinct for
 survical, for continuing the species, is deeply seated in us. A
 species that doesn't have that instinct or in whom it's not well
 developed does not survive in natural selection. But never mind
 natural selection! When because of age, health, or living conditions
 that instinct dies, the individual loses the will to live. But what
 kind of incentive to live could we give to our creation? Curiosity?
 The desire to be useful to those who created his body (which is
 perishable and replaceable) and who raised his person and his soul?
 The desire to be involved in studies of the world, in ultradistant
 travels, in the creation of transceiver stations for travels, in the
 construction of space bases near stars?
 332.  Are those incentives persuasive? Where would such an individual
 get fondness and love for those around him?  How would we raise him
 so that he wouldn't turn out to be a monster with absurd, senseless
 aspirations for power or for the opportunity to give orders? How
 would we raise him to learn from and be like his benefactor? Or just
 the opposite. How would we raise him so that he wouldn't turn out to
 be an infantile, passive being who-is apathet-tc a     the-world
 about those around him, and about himself?
 333.  And finally, there would be enormous technical problems. How do
 we think? How are the stereotypes of our responses, our behavior, our
 evaluations created? How does our individuality come about? The
 algorithms of our perception of the world around us, of our analysis,
 and of our thinking are probably created anew in every human and, to
 a certain extent, differently. Their nature is determined by family,
 friends, and enemies; by school and the structure of society; by the
 joys and pains and successes of childhood. A society of slaves raises
 slaves, a society of freemen, freemen. From that standpoint, it's
 very dangerous to standardize methods of education.  That's the most
 terrible thing we can do for our future.  Mankind can be strong only
 when there are differences, diversity, and individuality. Of course,
 there must be certain common bases: love those around you, don't
 steal, don't kill, don't covet. But to prepare man fit a mold is to
 prepare our own demise.
 334.  Without having sorted all those things out, how can we set
 about creating artificial intelligence?
 335.  But the notion of it has already entered our consciousness.
 Perhaps the most popular problem among the most curious and
 C00175716
 Page: 58    of 86
 Concatenated JPRS Reports, 1991
 Document 5 of 10                                                 Page  51
 enterprising among us is to create artificial intelligence. We have
 to think about it, because it's going to happen.
 336.'  And difficulties that are more comprehensible would come up. If
 we were to transmit an individual over galactic distances, we would
 have to create antennas whose dimensions measured in kilometers, plus
 transmitters with powers on the order of a 100 million kW. At the
 same time, if we were to effect such galactic transfers, we would
 have to create receiving and transmitting stations (in the radio
 range, for example), use unmanned space vehicles, for example, to put
 them at possible destination points (as a rule, not far from some
 star, so as to ensure that the transceiving stations would have a
 supply of energy). We could transport the transceiving stations, but
 we could only take the technology and a minimum set of instruments
 and robots for the manufacture of those stations at the destination.
 337.  The speeds of space vehicles that are now flying in the solar
 system are in the tens of kilometers a second. It's possible for us
 to achieve speeds in the hundreds or even thousands of kilometers per
 second. But that means that it would take millions or even hundreds
 of millions of years to "transport" the stations about the galaxy.
 Transporting stations at such speeds even to the closest stars, which
 are tens of light years away from us, would take thousands or tens of
 thousands of years. In that length of time, the interest in the
 project itself might be lost.
 338.  One could imagine another means of star traveling: establish
 communications with other civilizations; transmit to them the
 information on the construction of transceiving stations suitable for
 receiving "our" people; transmit the information needed for
 manufacturing a material carrier of "our" individual; transmit the
 information package with "our" traveler; and set up an exchange of
 information with them.
 339.  Reflecting on stellar flights enables us to single out several
 promising areas of work that we would be wise to pursue in the coming
 decades. They include the following: create ever larger radio
 telescopes with outputs measuring in the kilometers; develop space
 robots and designs and ideologies for space "beacons"; study the
 possibility of creating artificial intelligence; and search for
 channels of communications to other civilizations in the solar
 system.
 340.  Those areas are well in keeping with the modern needs of man.
 Work on artificial intelligence is associated with solving the
 problem of creating sufficiently efficient robots to replace people
 in dangerous production work and help us in our exploration of water
 areas and the underwater world and in construction. The creation of
 C00175716
 Page: 59    of 86
 Concatenated JPRS Reports, 1991
 Document 5 of 10                                                 Page  52
 space robots is a an idea whose time has come. Robots would be more
 effective in working in open space than is men in space suits. And
 operations in open space will probably expand in the coming decades.
 341.  The construction of large radio telescopes will enable us to
 make more efficient studies of the Universe.
 343.  Without any pretense to making an exhaustive list of the tasks
 facing space operations in the coming decades, I will attempt to
 describe the goals on which, in my opinion, it makes sense to focus
 our efforts:
 344.  1. Low-orbit systems of standardized satellites for
 environmental monitoring, studies of natural resources, and weather
 observations, with computerized ground centers for processing the
 information and a computerized system for delivering the results to
 subscribers.
 345.  2. Orbital cloud-stations as bases for experimental and
 construction work.
 346.  3. Orbiting factories for the production of ultrapure materials
 and biological preparations and for performing other production
 processes that would be profitably or advisedly done in orbit.
 347.  4. Unmanned space vehicles in an international satellite system
 for observing and monitoring land, sea, and ocean surfaces, air
 transport, and underwater activity, with a system for distribution
 the information to subscribers.
 348.  5. Systems of radio telescopes placed in near-Earth and
 circumsolar orbits and operating in a single radio interferometry
 configuration.
 349.  6. Orbital astrophysical observatories working in various
 spectral ranges.
 350.  7. Unmanned vehicles for bringing back Martian soil and air
 samples (if, as a result of those operations, it turns out to be
 necessary to perform a manned mission to Mars, then the appropriate
 manned mission systems will have to be developed and built).
 351.  8. Reusable transport spacecraft that are cheap (cost of
 delivering payload to orbit in the hundreds of dollars per kilogram)
 for transport operations between Earth and orbit.
 C00175716
 Page: 60    of 86
 Concatenated JPRS Reports, 1991
 Document 5 of 10                                                 Page  53
 352.  9. Cheap, reusable transport spacecraft for transport
 operations between low orbit and geostationary orbit.
 353.  10. Space robots for operations in open space in Earth
 satellite orbits.
 354.  Table of Contents
 355.  What's Been Done So Far?..3
 356.  The Experience We've Garnered.-6
 357.  Forthcoming Tasks in Space..12
 358.  The Space Hardware of the Near Future..16
 359.  Orbital Injection Systems.-19
 360.  Orbiting Solar Electric Power Plants..22
 361.  Orbiting Factories..26
 362.  Radio telescopes..27
 363.  The Cloud-Station..27
 364.  The Lunar Base..29
 '365.  The Mars Mission..34
 366.  A Base in Geostationary Orbit..44
 367.  Space Settlements..51
 368.  Flight to the Stars..55
 369.  What Needs to Be Done?..62

