 C00015355
 10 029
 QfCC Memorandum ? UNITED STATES GOVERNMENT
 TO    , .d mutant for Ups  lions, Oil
 nfa      f  . Haydon {ihnnnit         w'
 MOM   $  1.ciof, Contract i-i sion, 00
 SUBJECT: tualifornia COSzAttee for saucer Investigation
 1. keeently, a member of the Los t.ngeleie'Otfice had occasion to hear Lr.
 Walter Riedel tell something of the activities of the California Coz ittee for
 Saucer investigation (C.I). dis co manta, at follows, r Ay be et latereat;
 2.  i)r. Model indicated. he was Pornarly Chief Designer at 'he German #x-
 perinental kooket Center at Poenemusnde. He has been in the b.3 as a epapercliF" ,.,r
 scientist for some years.  go is now a Project sagieaor in the .teropbysia'
 i)epartmenz (Guided :Assilos) of this North   rj~w",    _9,q , he gave every
 impression of bee   a oa psteat sotontst, eapeo a   ksawledgeable an rocket
 matters.  He seemed a balanced person, not given to tixatigns.
 3. Cal has been in operation sans years oaaspoaed of private individuals
 intrigued and sciantitically interested in finding an explanation for Msauoer"
 yhenowona. To date? they have received sore 1570 Utters relatin; tc reporteJ
 sightiaga. Of thin?lalnber they have been able to iv u3iataly or quiokly elit-
 saate 73v as not warte- follow-u . the great prol.ortLon of this 2SD haw been
 discarded upon further investigation. What was somewhat sue rising to the writer
 was the sxbaustivenesa with which these investigations are being mode. Not only
 are very careful calculations made, if the data exists, to check the }oasibility
 of the report being   finally possible (e.g., in terms of lines of sight), but
 the individual reporting the sighting to investigated privately at his place a:'
 residence to establish a  feral baakground of reliability and credibility.  Of
 the :in investigated, perhaps 25 or so sightings have been established as "ra3.iabla"
 in the sonss that no knew exists  explanation exists for them.  Apparently, most
 of these have been forwarded to W~ht field Dayton, Ciao, although there appears
 to be a tiro lag of mono duration while 0dI Is making its ova shook and calculations.
 ur. kisdalta doasri}.tion of one reported sighting by a Told pilot and any, and the
 follow-up with respect to it, was Impressive to the writer in the thought applied,
 the pains taken, and the very careful application of tcieatifis method.
 2,. do serious is CAI frith reapost to its investigation that Dr. 11isdel indi-
 cated that thoy are going to execute a planned "hoar over the Los Angeles area,
 in order to teat the reaction and roliability of the public in general to unusual
 aerial phaaorena.  (The sightings reported over $olibu is the.sLos:.logelor-papeat..tlf::
 ?)an?g) could possibly be this hoax.) From this axperimont; whey hops to ascortain
 how many people report 4w aerial visual phenanonon inch has been conducted so as to
 be clearly visible to a*-lange number of people in the area.  They will also, of
 courso, be able to test the variation of report dotailu, eta.  This exper.Lnent is
 designed Lo give u oai.t.gr b-ok;ru<rd tt;a ::.st which lutura ai;htirga.ocan b,: f??aluatod.
 Q
 C00015355
 i.,,,.arently, an eye and interest are a1uo directed toward the U. -k.,
 for rcbctionx to  iXhtin s an rc~artcd in she. PRAV,4 are observed.  ibis interc:,t
 is also evident in the japer entitled "ttockeLS  a~iiiua`th 'Zrcn L'urtain",
 ::resented before the annual convention of the .aerican Rocket :society in Piero
 York City an 4 Deceaber'1952, by George to our:ton, also of aorophysics Depart-
 gent. (Iiorth American Aviation, Inc.)and associated with CSI.
 6.  OI' incidental Interest may be the tact that NAA (Vationa.l aeronautics`
 ..aaociation) suggested politely and perhaps indirectly-to Dr. Riedel `bat he
 disassociate hLasnlf from official membership an CJs.

