 C00015482
 INFORMATION FROM
 POREION DOCUMENTS ON RADIO NROADCASTI
 COUNTRY     Non-Orbit                           DATE OF
 INFORMATION  1954
 SUBJECT     Military - Oaidentifisd fling objects
 NOW
 PUBLISHED   Dril., newspapers
 DATE DIST. Aal 0-.t 2154
 WHERE
 PUBLISHED   As indieatsd                        NO. OF PAGES
 DATE
 PUBLISHED   31 Jul-20 Sep 1954
 THIS IS UNEVALUATED INFORMATION
 SIGRTINCS Or 1711rDwring!) MIX OUR=,
 31 JULY-20
 "FLYING SAUCER' SIGHTED OVER 31 GE71?L -- Vienna, Rena Viener Tageszeitung,
 21 Aug 54
 Bregenz, 20 August -- Three inhabitants of Hard, on the Lake 39' Constance.
 observed a "flying saucer" at about 2045 hours or. 19 August.  A carpenter nsm*J
 Fessler, his sou-in-lav, and Kioser, a teacher, described it as follovs:  a a.J11
 gleaalm disk-she!rd 0 ject, s4out twice as laree as Venus, cow from the soutt-
 vest, flyang In the dieection of Pfsender.  Suddepl; it turned and vent In the
 opposite direction, caking some a_rupt zLCzags over Bregenz.   After at,out 2
 minutes, it disappeared into a bank of clouds.  .
 'P!'  FOR fl LEt,SE
 DAtf . r.~. :::.7.:..._...
 C00015482:,
 MARY PERYONS SEE UNUSUAL ODdEC? OVER ?MIS -- Paris, Le Parteien Libere,
 3 Sep 54
 Jolivet, a resident of Paris, reporte! tMr. on 30 August, be had noon
 a luminous, circular object rt.;1ng over the city. After his report appeared
 is the press, rang' other persons lsourea go,es naaeo gad aadrreussj reportei
 that the; had witnessed the phenoae>on on tte same toy.  some of the re;.arts
 indicate that the object vas beaded south-southwest, while other reports
 indicate a northeast direction; ;rut, according to Claire Cordier and Andre
 0reftier, two natives of Angers, the obveet disappeared toward the .wr'.h.
 iClaire Cordier reported a "digit" fl Ing over her hone town as well; see
 below.,
 "fL ING DISK" SIGHTED IN WESTERN FRAME -- Algiers, Alger Repuoticain, 4 Sep 54
 A disk-r.1m set o.Sect was  no date Given] a?oc:v.d U. vac.ou, person:
 oinultaneousl, at about 2020 hours, ti. ng over ..ngcrs and Lion-d'Angera, bosh
 in'tatne -et-Lv:re Department, and over Chateau Cantles, Ma,enne Department.
 The ob,cct van generall; detas being .brown and emitting a seoce trail of
 an odd hue of -xeen.  Amcor&in; to Claire Cor'?ier, a nurse in AnCers, the object
 rave orf it sort drone, acd ::? ,\.v was rcctnlstent at the Light In noon tubes.
 The phenonenun was visiole for several ulnutes.
 A 2i- car-old mason and his assistant report twat recent).:'  on , dei.tcr.,r*r;
 see ..elovj .' -_ saw a gra  object reset ling a truncated nillstune with a lnr;;e
 inverted p.-te 1 tag on it in a field niout 200 meters from the road where the,
 were ?i_.c1in;;, near Acheux-en--..nicno's. , tombs Department.  7 e object uscil-
 lateb slowl  and sterei to have a closed door on its side.  When th.:xn hat
 run about 50 .eters toward it, the o., ject began to fl     ova... Snake was then
 visible from a sort of exhaust pipe on the underside.        After an oblique :'?i~:;t
 of about 17 meters, the o.:ject rose vcrtica)1, and disappeared.  irolicc tact-
 found no tracts of the object.
 Paris, Le Parisicn Li.,ere, 14 Sep 54
 Ealie Renard, a risen, and Yves de Ouiller:"ca, his assistant, saw what
 the.. considered to be a "fl_ Lug saucer" at 0.15 hours cm i septenie .  Rot::
 men are taovn to ce wart reliable.  1'e;: stated that the o.-.wet ap.erentl,
 never touched ground, .?ut hovered abov the ground li.x a helicopter.    it was
 about 10 meters in diameter and 3 t;eters in height, did not glow, and Jepartci
 notselessl , trailing smoke as it took off.  Tht,  saw the object for at least
 3 .inutes.
 "i1.r1N0 DISK" SIGHTED IN AI3R DEPJfM1iTf           Le Parisien L3hure.
 14 Sep 54
 ?
 At about 0330 hours on i 3epteauer, Robert Chovel and his wife and tsther-
 in law were driving home from the theater in Hirscn, Aisne Department, vein
 tbe;? env a luminous. red oraq,-e "disk" flint a:o,e the railroad track.  The
 "disk" stopped suddenl; across the road, 3.,c,-4J" aeters from the ground. It
 seemed to have on its upper side a small luminous tail forming an integral part
 of the object.
 When the travelers reached the bridge at Buirs, they saw what the, beltuvai
 to ne a 'fl,ing saucer' increasinG its altitude; as soon as the car 'lights
 braced on it, the outset started firing at great speed toward La Nerie, 3-4
 kllmtastera away, and disappeared.
 UNUSUAL OHJECtS SIGVED OVER NORKAM  -- Paris, Franc-Tireur, 16 lisp 54
 A similar phenomenon was reportedly seen by a farmer in Thaan, also in
 Calvados Department.
 RELIEVE 'FLYING SAUCER" Pa.O'IS WERE S1WOCLEAS -- Parts, Franc-Tireur,
 16 Sep 54
 The following is additional information on reports of two cases cited in
 the TblS roundup of 14 September 1954.)
 Two of'the alleged recent landings ion 10 September) in France of 'flyin,;
 saucers" are considered by the local air police to have been nothing mare than
 the landing of planes used in smugling.  Furthermore, in one casc, the far:ar
 to Corre:e Department stated that the pilot uttered unintelligible words:  et
 the farmer was certainly no polyglot and could easily have been fooled.  In the
 other case, in Valenciennes Department, the witness may have .men sincere, but
 it should be noted that he had a cranial traumatic:: one year ago and several
 nervous disturuances since.  It is true, however, that in the latter came. the
 air police found four unusual marks an the railroad ties near the spot indicatca
 Dy the witness, arks that could not have  men made by the tools of railroad
 workers.
 Orossuto, 16 Sept*?-:ver -- Two inhabitants of P;tiCliaao repo:,- the
 stghtinC of a round, white ol.ject caking a stra  e, loud noise, fl;in:, net..
 Grosseto in Tuscany, on 14 September.  Tac object cane to a standstill at.1
 then disappeared at high speed.
 )4TdTERIOUS O?IJECT O3SERVED OVER R0S  -- Daher, Paris-Daisr, 20 Sup 54
 Rome, 18 September (Al?) -- On the afternoon of 11 depteaber, the eontrul
 tower at the Ciampino air base observed a mysterious o..ject shaped like half a
 cigar flying slowly at an altitude of about 1,200 meter:.  The ubject, leaving
 a troll of luminous smocc, was visible for about 40 minutes.  These           twe
 .over watched the o.--Sect mate a 4OO-deter dive and then tgmin its for_rr alti-
 tude, movie? from a horizontal to a vertical position.  As the object toot urr
 toward the sea, the Ciaspirs tove: notified the Frstica at Were control :owe:,
 C00015482   .
 30 ktloaeters fraa Ro..c, which picked up the object and followed it on ita
 redder screen t?jr about :'O minutes. The radar Shored the presence of an ehtonnn
 lxaUed at the center of the widest part of the object.
 ?n.n io aWCERS" UVEf 'fH5 MOUE -- A..sterdas, Ow Teiearaef, 6 :,ua 54
 Ten firemen and their chief oo,iervodirvo "flying saucers" over Tue HO :W
 on the nt;,ht of % August between 2300 and 2400 hours.  The obja:ts were see::
 in the clear night al:- at a blab alLltude.  They coved at  neredible speel, _
 at tines remaining s.otionless for as long as 30 seconds.  They were deacriueJ
 as being net ovals with a whittah-gray lljht.  All of the observers agreed
 taut the objects mould not have been aircraft or balloons.
 SIOlff U;ZDE 'IFII:D FLYING OBJECTS OVER IZMIN PROVINCE -- Nicosia, Habit. arcs,
 31 Jul 54
 I air, 30 Jul; (Turtish News Agency) -- It has been reported that uaiJe:.t.?
 fled fl??ing objects have recentl; been *bserved in time say aver U$;, Pruvincv.
 These objects, which have been sighted by thousands of persons iii the Ga.?c.,s.
 area of Izmir Province, w"e flytn; at treat speed frat+ east to went.
 0  17 Aui;uct, at approximately 1000 hnu:s, as the A;Valid-ic.i. , c
 ap,:-oacbe1 the Be: ;a..a road intersection, pascen, e s observed aalive
 oval object in the air.  Hustafa Turuut, une of the. 25 passenJe:s, stare.: t::u:.
 the object api.ea:ei to be ver; close to the ;rouni and that V. euitteJ a :.-.Al
 rustling sound, rose, and disappeared.
 ur:IDErrrIFIM FLYING OaJECT.i OVER TU?ICELI FkOVIlk:t -- Istan:.u_, Custer t.c:,
 iicrat,     Au,tust -- At approsimtel; lo0O nours toda;, two
 fly:n; objects wen o:served traveling a: an sltitsJe of 0.0itu t.,eter>.  o... ...
 the ouiemtc, which appeared from southwest of the town of Hoxat, nailiLa: !:j
 l._
 cows. aid left in a northeasterly direction.  Tre other o..,,cet first rose t
 a cunsi3eraLle height and then disappeared in                                                be same di?vcttun.
 "FLYING SAUCERS" SEEN IN EAS-f AFRICA -- Paris. Le Parisien L_be.,-c. 1+ 3t. SL
 Haopela, 13 Septeuuer -- A civil servant stated that he and see:.
 unspecified? over Elaapsla, Uganda, a st:an,;e ;,olden bail vhie:. apirte:en tt :.o
 caller than the coon At la:iger than a star.
 Several other inhabitants in test Africa also :let:. to have ceo:.
 saucers" recentl,?.
 C00015482
 PAR EAST
 Singapore
 SMOGS LIOMT SEflV OVER AIRP1m.R ?- Calcutta, Jugsotar, 6 Sep jh
 A mysterious light traveling at hish speed vas observed over Singapore on
 ti-- night of b September.  Several per     s reported this sighting to the
 British aviation authorities at Xsiar Iota; Kallangt] Airfield.  A British
 official said that at least sib. Parsons reFurted seeing the light.  Rosemary
 Whitley, wife of a goverment rs.Uo engineer, Said that she saw a huge white
 light traveling at a very high  ?e:d over the airfield.

