 C00175459
 Page: 8     of 13
 CLAS UNCLASSIFIED
 CLAS UNCLASSIFIED
 AFSN 934E1016A
 DQAT 930714
 SLIM Moscow IZVESTIYA in Russian 14 Jul 93 p 8
 SUBJ 'Flying Saucer' Financial Problems Viewed
 Full Text Supersone of Message
 1    //((Article by IZVESTIYA writer Viktor Litovkin: "'Flying Saucers' Made in
 Saratov"))
 2    ((Text)) ((begin bold)) The device you see in the photo is called a highly
 economical flying apparatus of the Ekip firm, but simply put it is a
 "flying saucer." It is made at the Saratov Aircraft Plant.((end bold))
 3    Ekip president Anatoliy Savitskiy told me that the "saucer's" general
 designer is Lev Shchukin, and it is based on the surface effect combined
 with the "air cushion" effect.  Because of this the apparatus is capable
 of shipping cargo equal to practically half its own weight while the cargo
 giant Mriya can lift only a third its own weight into the air.  The
 "saucer" was created several years ago, but because of a lack of money it
 has not yet taken its place in the ranks.
 4     To be sure, last summer an experimental model of the "saucer" with a
 diameter of 2.5 meters flew over the plant airfield, but the actual
 apparatus, even if controlled by radio in the test flight, was to have
 been sent up this fall.  But for the same reason--a shortage of
 finances--its departure from the shop has been postponed until spring.
 In addition to its unique cargo capacities, the "saucer" can move at an
 altitude of 8-10 km over a distance of 8,500 km with a speed of 650-700 km
 per hour.  It does not need airfields.  It can take off and land on snow,
 water, swamps, and hard ground.  And its proportional fuel expenditure is
 considerably less than that of an airplane. The vehicle does not go into a
 tailspin.  This makes its flight safer and makes it possible to use pilots
 who do not have very high qualifications.
 6    The director of the Saratov plant, Aleksandr Yermishin, thinks that the
 "saucer" has a great future.  One wonders how, after the landslide
 conversion when all the best specialists began to leave, it managed to
 retain them, promising to include in the plant program the unique flying
 apparatus of the Ekip firm.
 7    Anatoliy Savitskiy told me that the 120-tonne "saucer" with a diameter of
 25 meters will cost approximately $70 million.  Many foreign firms have
 expressed a desire to participate in its creation.  But Russia still has
 priority in making this fantastic dream come true.  (endall)
 19/1805z Jul BT 98921 NNNN
 130
 Approved for Release

