 2 0 JUt.196b
 TF3iOUi%'~iDmt FOIL: Chief, Defensive Systems Dirlsica/021
 SVBJI'CT:          Air Force Request to Declassify an OST
 Paper on UfO's
 REF'ERL1C'a:       C14/03I "Report of the Scientific Panel
 on Unidentified.Flying Objects" dated
 February 1953
 1.  Mrs. Sara B. Hunt,. of the Office of Inf   ation,
 Office of the secretary of the Air Force, visited. D.
 8. stevenX954  , 19 July 1036 to discuss an Air 3'o    re-
 quest to de  assify the referenced report.                     ?~`` s.-r r
 2.  lira. Hunt indicated that this request was trig`
 gored by the 12 May "CES' Reports" program,  Dr. H. P.         .- ; r~
 Robertson, Chairman of the panel, was on.thd show and re=
 portecily made sufficient references to. CIA involvement is  ;; "? ;,i. ;'
 Ui'O analysis to cause a press reaction.                        ~.?
 3.  A review of the doe rents supplied by Mrs. Hunt
 shoved that~..r. Phil Stroiad approved a similar Air
 Force re ue    n Decenber   ai.  This resulted in a san-
 itized veraica of the original consultants' report.  This
 report presented most of the conclusions but it did not
 refer to the original rceeti   minutes, case histories, or
 indicate CIA involvement.      as Baldwin has 052 copies
 of the reports and correspo ence).
 4.  Although the Air. Force request now in OSI does
 not request additional declassification. Mrs. Hunt ex-
 pressed the 'view that thi  was intended..  Mrs. Runt said
 that the Air Force is noyltrying to declassify all U.S.
 Goversxsont work on U:0'2.
 further decla3oif ication, I suggested that !Ire. !font ask
 the Air Povea originator to submit a second request, if
 they wanted declassification of additional material from
 the minutes and case histories.
 5.  Inasmuch as my review of the original material
 shaved ::ate 3      +aa; t doleticac would ba r:qui.od for
 #UflJEt ; Air b rce Request to Declassify an OSZ Vapor an
 W'0's
 6.  Kra. Runt said that a sore specific request Motiid
 be sent to us in the near future..
 7.  1tr. LaOeIa. Is boidi ug the recent Air !areas request
 until ifs .    t cc  acts ui.
 Distribution:
 Orig k 1 -. Addressee
 2 - DD/031
 2 - AC343/DSD/OSX

