 C00174667
 Page: 3     of 14
 FBIS Concatenated Daily Reports, 1993
 Document 6 of 13                                                 Page   1
 Classification:   UNCLASSIFIED       Status:        [STAT]
 Document Date:      21 Jan 93        Category:      [CAT]
 Report Type:      Daily report       Report Date:
 Report Number:    FBIS-EEU-93-027    UDC Number:
 Author(s):  Zorica Miladinovic; place and date not given: "There Is
 No Defense Against `Invisible' Airplanes")
 Headline:  Expert Gives Warning of Stealth Technology
 Source Line:  93BA0537B Belgrade BORBA in Serbo-Croatian 21 Jan 93 p
 Subslug:  [Interview with Major Radoman Miadjenovic, retired, Air
 Force and Air Defense, by Zorica Miladinovic; place and
 date not given: "There Is No Defense Against `Invisible'
 Airplanes"]
 FULL TEXT OF ARTICLE:
 1.   [Interview with Major Radoman Miadjenovic, retired, Air Force and
 Air Defense, by Zorica Miladinovic; place and date not given: "There
 Is No Defense Against `Invisible' Airplanes"]
 -- JText-] -Representatives- f-- the--Ar-my-o?-Yug  l-av-i-a-[ J-}--are- s&Ting-----------
 more and more frequently and loudly that we are completely capable of
 successfully resisting "any aggressor" in case of a possible
 military intervention.  Following the most recent American military
 intervention against Iraq, however, ordinary people are becoming more
 dubious. Radoman Miadjenovic, a major retired from the RV i PVO [Air
 Force and Air Defense], where he was a pilot, who recently took his
 master's degree on the B-2 nuclear bomber, the American "camouflage
 miracle" manufactured with "stealth" technology, says in an
 interview with BORBA that there is no successful defense against the
 Stealth airplane, which has just been used in Iraq.
 3.  [Miladinovic] What characteristics make it possible for Stealth
 airplanes to be invisible?
 4.  [Miadjenovic] The Americans have been working on the program of
 the Stealth airplane, the so-called Black Program, since 1980 (at
 that time, only 2 percent of the congressmen knew that it existed).
 Its existence was made public through the "promotion" of the B-2
 nuclear bomber at a California airfield, when this "camouflage
 miracle" was presented to some 50 honored guests. The F-117 A
 ("polished diamond") recently (13 January) operated in Iraq;
 observers from the ground sometimes describe it as a UFO
 [unidentified flying object]; it is based in Great Britain, but is
 very easily based in Saudi Arabia as well. These planes are made of a
 Approved for Release
 go/
 000174667
 Page: 4     of 14
 FBIS Concatenated Daily Reports, 1993
 Document 6 of 13                                                Page   2
 composite material which "absorbs" and "passes" electromagnetic
 radar waves. The Delta wings conceal its tail. It has powerful
 ceramic engines which are so configured that the plane does not emit
 any infrared radiation, and its flight is silent. These
 characteristics allow it to be completely invisible or at best barely
 visible to radar systems, and it penetrates a PVO system unhindered.
 These airplanes usually go first, operate against missile systems
 used to defend a particular region or facility and make it possible
 for the aircraft that follow to "do their job." Because radars are
 the "eyes" of the PVO, it is clear that in this case they are
 blind.
 5.  [Miladinovic] Would these planes also be used in a possible
 military intervention against Bosnia?
 6.  [!Mladjenovic] If there is military intervention against Bosnia, I
 am certain that the Stealth planes will be used.  First, they might
 use the Black Rose, which is able to conduct reconnaissance and
 detect all radar frequencies, even when they are in "passive mode,"
 and to "transmit the picture" to the command post (even the
 Pentagon can get it by satellite). After that, it is likely that the
 Stealth bombers would operate against missile systems defending
 airfields or areas in Bosnia. I suppose that if the world decided on
 _that._kind_of_lntervention,_t_hey would operate against objectives in
 Bosnia from the Aviano base in Lombardy and from aircraft carriers to _
 the Adriatic. I further assume that they would first operate against
 the airfield in Banja Luka and afterward against artillery and
 missile positions around Sarajevo.  The Serbian Republic would be
 left largely without an air force, missile systems, and some of the
 artillery weapons.  In the FRY [Federal Republic of Yugoslavia],
 should there be military intervention, the Stealth planes would
 probably operate against the airfields at Batajnica, Pristina,
 Kraljevo, and Nis. Without wanting to frighten anyone, because I am
 talking about the hypothetical situation of a military attack, it
 should be said that successful defense against planes of this kind is
 not possible either in B-H [Bosnia-Hercegovina] or in Yugoslavia.
 7.  [Miladinovic] How-realistic, then, are the publicly expressed
 assessments of military officials, including General Panic, that we
 are able to repel any attack?
 8.  [Mladjenovic] It is true that we have a tough PVO system,
 especially around Belgrade, but it can be overpowered by an increased
 density of flights of Stealth and other aircraft. No one can
 guarantee the public that a city or portion of the country is
 absolutely secure. With a tough system of passive defense, using
 primary, reserve, or false firing positions, we can protect some of
 the missile batteries against bombardment. We might protect, say, a
 000174667
 Page: 5     of 14
 FBIS Concatenated Daily Reports, 1993
 Document 6 of 13                                                 Page   3
 missile base by emitting electromagnetic energy from some old radar.
 But as soon as we activate the real missile battery, its frequency
 would be picked up, and missiles could operate against it. At the
 same time, there is also the system of active defense, which
 presupposes using radars to detect Stealth aircraft. The Americans
 and Russians have been working on this for quite some time now, and
 radars of this kind do exist.  However, their detection range is
 still quite small, so that it does not facilitate complete "fire
 preparation" of PVO for counteraction. I do not know whether our
 army has such radar equipment.
 9.  [Miladinovic] Instead of the excessively optimistic assessments
 of Yugoslav defensive capability, according to what you say, would it
 not be more worthwhile to have the complete truth about this?
 10.  [Mladjenovic] The public ought to be told the real situation so
 as to be completely prepared for every wartime situation, including
 the hypothetical situation about which there has been so much recent
 talk. It is not capitulation to say openly that there are those who
 are stronger than we are. It is an objective assessment that there is
 no successful defense against "invisible" aircraft.  In case of
 intervention, Yugoslavia's RV i PVO would be destroyed for the next
 20 to 30 years. All of these assessments, however, can be prevented
 _and_ ave_rted_if_ _we _conduct_ a_peaceful--Rolicy__,_ _to which we committed
 ourselves recently in Geneva before the eyes of the entire world. We
 can get what we want through a reasonable policy far from the war
 option. Peace and a peaceful policy are our best defense.

