 C00015464
 CLAS  CAT
 CENTRAL
 REPORT NO000 -x-23682
 INFORMATION FROM
 FOREIGN DOCUMENTS OR RADIO BROADCASTS
 CD NO.                                                                                                            --
 COUNTRY
 Germany
 DATE OF
 IECT
 SUB
 Military; Scientific
 INFORMATION   1952
 .
 HOW
 DATE 01ST. 1.3 Avg 1952
 PUBLISHED
 WHERE
 Daily newspaper
 PUBLISHED
 DATE
 PUBUSHED
 Athens
 9 Jul 1952
 LANGUAGE
 Creek
 SUPPLEMENT TO
 REPORT NO.
 THIS IS UNEVALUATED INFORMATION
 '7LYXJG SAUCE. Z " IN EAST GSIG(ASY
 Berlin,                Furnished with the sworn testimony of as eyewitness,
 Oscar Make, a   Tear-old German mad former mayor of Gleimershauses, Vast
 Berlin intelligence officers have begun investigating a most unusual "flying
 saucer" story. According to this story, an object "resambliag a huge flying
 pan and having a diameter of about 15 meters leaded in:a forest clearing in
 the Soviet Zone of Germany.
 LInke recently escaped from the Soviet Zoaa along with his wife and six
 children.
 Links and his 21year-old daughter, iabriella, made the following sworn
 statement last week before a Jadgei  "While I was returning to q 'home with
 Gabriella, a tire of sq motorcycle blew cut dear the town of Basseibseh.
 While we were walking along toward E4sselbaeh, Gabriella pointed out some-
 thing which lay at a distance of about 140 asters away from us.  Sines it
 was twilight, I though that she was pointing at a young deer.
 "I left ay motorcycle near a tree and walked toward the spot which
 Gabriella bad pointed out.  When, however, I reached a spot about 55 meters
 from the object, I realised that ey first impression bad been wrong.  What
 I had seen were two men who were saw about 40 meters away from M.  They
 seemed to be dressed in some shiny metallic clothing.  They were stooped
 over and were looking at something lying on the ground.
 "I approached until I was only about 10 meters fran the.  I Fooled
 over a small fence and rhea I noticed a large object whose diameter I
 estimated to be between 13 and 15 meters.  It looked like a huge frying pan.
 "There were two rows of holes an its periphery, about 30 centimeters in
 circumference.  The space between the two rows was about 0.45 meters.  On
 the top of this metal object was a black conical tower about 3 meters high.
 ePl%/hey
 AtPamFOA EL
 BATE
 invAS, REe,
 a~'Y AllGyas?c..
 C00015464
 At that moment, my daughter, who bad remained a short distance behind
 on, called M.  The two men asst have board my daughter's voice because they
 immediately jumped on the conical tower and disappeared inside.
 "I had previously anted that one of the son Lad a lamp on the front part
 of his body which lit up at regular intervals.
 "Nov, the side of the object an which the boles Ltii been opened began to
 glitter.  Its color seemed green but later'turned to red.  At the sane tint I
 began to beer a alight but.  While the brightness and bum increased, the
 conical tower began to slide down into the center of the object.  The whole
 object, then began to rise slowly from the ground and rotate like a top.
 "It seemed to as as if it were s     ed by the cylindrical plant which
 had gone down from the top of the objecct  through the center, and bad now
 appeere'k from its bottom on the ground.
 .r
 "The object, surrounded ba ring of flames, was now a certain number of
 feet above the ground.
 -I then noted that the whole object had risen slowly from the ground.  The cylinder on which it was supported bad now disappeared ithia its center and
 had reappeared an the top of the object.
 "The rate of climb had now become greater.  At the same tine sy daughter
 and I beard a whistling sound similar to that beard when a boob falls.
 'The object rose to a horizontal position, turned toward a neighboring
 town, and then, gaining altitude, It disappeared over the heights and forests
 in the directic.-i of Stockholm.'
 Jimmy other persons who live in the sane area as Links later related that
 they saw an object which they thought to be a comet.  A shepherd stated that
 he thought that he was looking at a comet moving away at a low altitude from
 the height on which Luke stood.
 'After submitting his testiaoty is t:$ gage, Linke wade the following
 statement:  "I would have thought that both ay-daughter and I were dreaming
 if it were not for the following element involved: When the object had
 disappeared, I went to the place where it had been.  1 found a circular
 opening in the ground and it was quite evident that it was freshly dug.  It
 was exactly the same shape as the conical tower.  I was than convinced that
 I was not dreaming."
 Lints continued, "I had never heard of the term 'flying saucer' before I
 escaped from the Soviet Zone Into West Berlin.    When I saw this object, I
 Immediately thought that it was a new Soviet xilitary machine.
 "I confess that I was seized with fright because the Soviets do not want
 anyone to know about their work.  May persons have been restricted to their
 movements for may years in East Germany because they know too such."

