 C00041853
 0                                                         0
 a^~
 MEMORANDUM FOR: Director of Research and Development, DDS&T
 FROM             : Anthony A. Lapham
 General Counsel
 SUBJECT                                                   Proposed Research Project.-
 The author of the attached letter was an acquaintance of mine while
 I was in private practice. He called me on the phone several months ago
 and asked whether the Agency would have any interest in the research
 effort described in the attached letter. I expressed doubt, but said I
 would circulate the question if he put it in writing. The attached letter
 is the result. Do you have any potential interest? If, as I strongly suspect,
 you do not, I will let~~ down gently.
 Anthony K. Lapham
 Attachment
 OGC: AALI'
 Original - Addressee
 APR 03
 C00041853
 S In.   I
 1~rltlt'5 11
 STANFORD RESEARCH INSTITUTE
 f.1INLO I'.1RK. CAt IrOANIA 1140"?6
 14141 32G G700
 ;tay 31, 1977
 Anthony Lapham, Esq.
 General Counsel
 Central Intelligence Agency
 Washington, D.C.  20505
 OL'ar Tony:
 G-2-77
 I am following up on our earlier conversation suggesting that
 the Office of Research and Development (ORD) might have an interest
 in hearing and exploring avenues of research in which. we arc
 presently engaged.
 I would like, if agreeable, to discuss a comprehe-nsive
 research project on the global UFO phenomenon.  Its major elements
 include
 ?        Collection and analysis of existing policy, both official
 and undeclared, held by key governments on the UFO
 phenomenon
 ?        Analysis of selected data and research on the UFO phenomenon
 -  Formulation of critical research questions on the
 phenomenon
 -  Assessment of institutional and informal systems for
 gathering and storing data on the phenomenon
 ?        Assessment of alternative policy strategies on the UFO
 phenomenon
 ?        Formulation of a national research plan on the UFO
 phenomenon.
 On approval, this project will be executed by a multidisciplinary
 team at SRI, in collaboration with selected scientific and policy
 consultants.  We anticipate that the_analysis of selected UFO data
 may yield significant insight into dimensions of the UFO phenomenon
 that have been under-emphasized or overlooked.  Policy options will
 be assessed across an array of potential human values and alternative.
 C00041853
 Anthony Lapham, Esq.                                      May 31, 1977
 Central Intelligence Agency                                   Page 2
 "scenarios" for the UFO phe'1iomenon itself.  Our product will
 include a final report, suitable for selected or public release.
 .By coincidence I will be in Washington, D.C. on June 9 and
 would be available to meet then.  Alternatively, I could meet at
 any future date of your convenience, given reimbursement of travel
 expenses.
 With all good wishes.
 CENTER''FOR TH  STUDY. OF SOCIAL POLICY
 41M

