 000174670
 Page: 1     of 3
 FBIS Concatenated Daily Reports, 1994
 Document 1 of 3                                              Page   1
 Classification:   UNCLASSIFIED       Status:       [STAY]
 Document Date:    18 Mar 94          Category:     [CAT]
 Report Type:      Daily report       Report Date:
 Report Number:    FBIS-SOV-94-053    IJDC Number:
 Source Line:  LD1803490094 Moscow ITAR-TASS in English 0545 GMT 18
 Mar 94
 Subslug:  [ "Press Review " -ITAR-TASS headline]
 FULL TEgT OF ARTICLE:
 1.  [ "Press Review" -ITAR-TASS headline]
 2.  [Text] Moscow March 18 TASS (ITAR-TASS)- ROSSIYSRIYE VESTI opens
 up with a series of items under the general headline " A search for
 accord in Russian society is now really threatened by political
 ambitions, mutual distrust, and double morality " .
 3.  Mikhail Lapshin, leader of the Agrarian Party of Russia, assures,
 for example, that the party will participate in the elaboration of a
 memorandum of civil peace but will raise a lot of questions. In
 -------partlettlar- -abeut--the--revival-~the_BussiansQUntr~side and_wil_1 see______ ___
 to it in every way that  "accord would not lead to a suppression of
 part of society " .
 4.  Nikolay Travkin, leader of the Democratic Party of Russia, said
 he visualises the way to civil accord only in the attainment of
 agreement between the two branches of power-executive and
 legislative-and not in some single document, however complete it is
 and whatever the number of parties signing it.
 5.  TRUD comments on Thursday's [17 March] remarks made by Prime
 Minister Viktor Chernomyrdin at the Pederation council session,
 quoting him as saying that  " we do not need a state of emergency in
 the economy "  which is fully controlled by both the president of
 Russia and the government.
 6.  The newspaper's opinion is that if the measures mentioned by the
 Russian premier are implemented (namely, a solution to defaults of
 payments, a selective support of enterprises, restructuring, etc.)
 "the country will stand real chances to get out of the crisis."
 7.  RABOCSAYA TRIBUNA on the problem of non-payments.
 8.  Vladimir Chumakov, general director of the Yugtransgaz state-run
 enterprise, states that  "defaults of payments are our sore point
 Approved, for Release
 000174670
 Page: 2     of 3
 FBIS Concatenated Daily Reports, 1994
 Document 1 of 3                                              Page   2
 now. More than 60 per cent of the amount of sold gas has not been
 paid for."
 9.  Such a financial reality, Chumakov said,  "deforms our economic,
 technical and social policies " . In order to remove the cause of the
 economic disorganisation, he pleads the need to revise, first of all
 the taxation policy and to determine a reform policy in a clear-cut
 manner  " so that people and enterprises would know the direction we
 proceed along."
 10.  RABOCHAYA TRIBUNA singles out a report that Boris Shurinov,
 vice- president of the UFOlogy union, has accused a number of
 servicemen from the Russian Defence Ministry of  "clandestine sales "
 of information on .the UFO problem from secret archives to the
 Americans. Next week the newspaper promises to give details of the
 russian "UFO-gate" .
 il.  KRASNAYA ZVEZDA (Red Star) on Pavel Grachev-William Perry
 meeting:
 12.   "A fundamentally new relationship-businesslike, partner's and
 mutually respectful-is taking shape between the two great powers.
 They are imbued not with chill but with business efficiency which is
 -- - ------ --undeubt~dly-devoid-~f-Eerx~i.n-original~nthus.iasm_ which marked_the----------- _- ------- -
 turn of the decade " .                                  ~                            -
 13.  KOMSOMOLSKAYA PRAVDA carries an interview with Russia's former
 prosecutor-general Aleksey Kazannik who asserts that  "the incumbent
 authorities lack moral principles "  and that  "selfish interests are
 predominating among them" .
 14.  NEZAVISIMAYA GAZETA on the start of overt confrontation between
 Presidents Yuriy Meshkov of the Crimea and President Leonid Rravchuk
 of Ukraine, who cancelled Meshkov's decree about an autonomy
 referendum.
 15.   "This balancing on the verge of a precipice may also easily
 lead to an aggravation of Russo-Ukrainian relations and turn the
 Crimea from an increasingly costly health resort into a hotbed of
 civil war" .
 16.  NEZAVISIMAYA GAZETA carries an interview with Gennadiy Voronin,
 deputy chairman of the Russian state committee for the defence
 industry, who warns that Russia runs the risk of  "losing the status
 of great power "  and emphasises that  "the duty of the Russian state
 is to save its navy " .
 17.  PRAVDA gives prominence to the text of an address to the
 000174670
 Page: 3     of 3
 FBIS Concatenated Daily Reports, 1994
 Document 1 of 3                                              Page   3
 citizens of Russia by the leaders of the left-centre opposition who
 call on people to unite in order to  "prevent a final who will take
 care of national interests. But they will fail.  Everybody will fail,
 I will be the next president, and Russia will triumph.

