 National Investigations Committee on Aerial Phenomena (UICAP)
 Appears to be a fairly loose structurJbut rather
 efficient.   Stuart Nixon ( background in i vestigative
 journalism) is currently Executive Director.  He along with
 Sohn Acuff and Charles Miller ( backgrounds unknown) make
 up the organizations Editorial Review Board which is responsible
 for policy, including the newsletter,c Press and other, media
 relation,as well as opecial xajqq x reports and Xx progrsas.
 This board 7     1 relies heavily on both a loosely
 x 1a structured advisory group and a fairly well
 developed and well placed x3c network of investigators.
 The advisory group is made up of experts in xis many
 disciplines including physics, astronomy, anthropology,
 medicine and psychology.  This group also includes
 some ex-CIA and Defense Intelligence  ypes who advise on
 investibative techniques and  ,TIrAP  Government relations.
 There does not seem to be any logic   or systematic
 progran by which these advisors are chosen, but rather
 ax the procedure seems to be to simply offer one's services
 to the organization-through either Nixon or the Review Board.
 Often the advisorrsiply joined VIC?P( a rather easy
 task since.all it takes is a specified;membership dux fee)'
 found something out about the organization and then
 made their qualificatio "6 known to the Review Board.
 The at .system of investigators is a good one.   Nxor. has
 divided the country into regions and has estab4 s?~e
 "in_vesti "ators" in each of the regions.  Any"a  ?erof
 NI'CAP is encouraged to x--xk%itrc request a form by which
 one can apply for this position.  The requirements for
 the position xz m?xtmxcbex  include a minimum age of 25,
 formal training or experience in some branch of science,' or
 other specialized back round applicable to systematic
 collection or information, the ability to cover an area of
 at least 50 miles in diameter aX or one hour of driving time.
 As of a few months ago some 35 investigators were located
 throughout the country, with VIC~;fin the process of establishing
 even more.  A break;; n of their backgrounds looked like the
 following: 7 PhDs, 2;:As or !!S, 23 BAepr PS, lAA and 24th
 college traini-s but no degrees.  Occupationally  they
 included 4 physical scientists, 13 engineers, 3 college profs,
 13 specialists, including doctor, technician, computer .
 prougra. mer and businessman.  . lve of the.35 are pilots.  Also
 exxtyx utilized as " legmen" for the investigators are
 investi-z-tor xxsta assistants.   -11 investigators carry
 ixx credentials xt identifying them as investigators for NICAP.
 NICAP currently operates on a 640,000 yr. budget
 and has 3,500 dues paying members.  Both the membership
 and the budget may be expected to increase:abet x*tkx
 aubstatially due to the recent UFO flap.
 A computer project codenamed? *Project AcDas" is currently
 i:i the mill.  an effort is being made to" develop some
 sort of pattern analysis out of the 15 -000 or more raw
 reports reportedly in NICAP's files,  hia apparently
 will take the following forma
 event- including time, place, terrain, weather
 speed, color, dx shape. and other
 information
 principals-including data on all witnesses
 and others involved In recants
 such as '*-I* data, medical
 info .and asychologi cal aspects
 f
 investigation 1x%- u ding  evaluation ?
 i-WFU4.a canna ayva. a.&
 notes from the regional
 investigator on witness
 discrepancy in testiony etc....
 is apparently the xm organizational structure and
 within 1UIC.:P:

