 C
 16 723ayr 1958
 =011  UN FOR RECORD
 SUBJECT:  Hosting with Air Force Personnel Concerning Scientific
 Advisory Panel Report on Unibentified dying Objects,
 dated 17 January 1953 (Secret)
 1. A meeting was convened this date 'with representatives of
 the i r Force to discuss what steps should be taken concerning the
 subject report in order to take care of inquiries such as the
 letters written by Mr. Leon Davidson. Mr. Davidson has been most
 insistent upon getting the entire report released.?The ftLll'report
 is classified ?Secret." A declasnified'version is available, a
 copy of loch was given to Her. Davidson.
 2.     The following personnel were at the meetings
 jr; Philip 3i $tir'na,~ -   RMW612 CIA
 or Joseph I. Boland         SAP LJr3-
 Major James F. Byrne        AICIr-Ua
 Major Lawrence J. Tacker    SAILS .
 1J. E. Lexo             OSI, CIA
 panel members specifically requests  that      they had no
 'objection to their names being used in connection with the report,
 they did not wa:3t their names connected to the Central Intelligence
 Agency.  So far it is believed that all connections between the
 W.91 --members and CL. have been made by noffici'a1 personnel.
 4. In dealing specifically with Mr. Davidson it was agreed
 that Major Tacker would answer for the?DCI?at the same time that he
 was arswsri g for the Air l oreee.  (Hr. Davidson'sent a copy of his
 lette  to Major Tacker to the DU for a response.)   ??
 5. (  Strom   inted out that perhaps the best way to
 fo:ast."?l any future inquiries along these lines was to put ow a?
 press release covering the subject of unidentified flying objects,
 utiliz.r? the panel report as much as possible. Major Boland agreed
 3. Paragraph 3 of the report cites examples of aotfona'that
 could be taken by an' enemy with possibly dangerous consegaeuces
 to national security.  This is the principal reason that the entire
 report cannot be declassified.  Th  ass dtto in the meeting.
 In ada...ition, it was pointed out by. Stro     t several of the
 000015410
 vs
 - '. '. C?iD{Z' (Lisrn to the DCI)      ' .
 Basting vith Air Force Personnel Concerning Scientit.t
 Advisory Panel Report on Unidentified Flying Objects,
 dated 17 January 2953 (Secret)
 that this was perhaps the best vay to'bardle it, inasmech as in his
 capacity of legislative liaison, it would best satisfy congressional  `
 requirements. Major Tacker v111 draft an Air Force press release"~~
 clea_--lsg it =I   the    ous sections of the Air For=-* eni Will.
 then s_bndt    o   . Car for Agancy review, Ckr-          consult
 and               V11on
 with the Office o  ecnxlty,~Flr. 3 l~~   4M
 6.  3e Air Force representatives believe that much of the  ?  .
 trouble they have been having .with Major ROADS along these same
 lines could be alleviated if the N.ajo: did not have sucks important.
 personages as Use Addral R. H. RLLlnkoettar, l   (?~et.), forcer
 DCI, on the board of golrernars of !.pis organization. They suggested
 that perhaps if the A&=-%1 was eh wn the Secret panel'  Dort he
 Would understand and take apprep.-3 te. actions   ,.L it     th.
 he would relate this suggsstioa tok4r. onsGa:t   rat    ousel.).
 7. J jor Boland srgieated that it night be advisable to contact
 the panel mashers to consider a rewarding of the panel report
 soseu`Sat along the lines that Dr. Hanel suggested in his letter to
 al the raesbers of the panel.     Yranselt  b}s received' the unclassified
 version from W. Icon Davidson. UIr. 8      eels that this may be
 inadvisable at the present tithe, amoeh as the report has already
 been rads available ":P L'..v public and any change map arouse suspicion.
 Powa.er, he will. c-m+,act Le. Robertson and discuss this. .  .
 OSI/ASm        gl16532

