 C00175709
 Page: 4     of 63
 Concatenated JPRS Reports, 1990
 Document 5 of 16                                                 Page   1
 Classification:   UNCLASSIFIED       Status:        [STAT]
 Document Date:    12 Apr 90          Category:      [CAT]
 Report Type:      JPRS Report        Report Date:
 Report Number:    JPRS-USP-90-004    UDC Number:
 Author(s):  SELSKAYA ZHIZN correspondent V. Shcherban, under the
 rubric "Today is the Space Program Day" : "The
 Satellites Are Launched at Dawn..." ; first two
 paragraphs are source introduction]
 Headline:      State Commission Chairman Kiyenko on Economic Impact of
 Satellite Programs
 Source Line:  90700080 Moscow SELSKAYA ZHIZN in Russian 12 Apr 90 p 3
 Subslug:   [Interview with Yuriy Pavlovich Kiyenko, deputy chairman of
 the USSR Council of Ministers' Main Administration of
 Geodesy and Cartography and chairman of the State
 Commission for Launches and Use of Cosmos-series,
 Resurs-type Satellites, by SELSKAYA ZHIZN correspondent V.
 Shcherban, under the rubric "Today is the Space Program
 Day " : "The Satellites Are Launched at Dawn..."; first
 two paragraphs are source introduction]
 FULL TEXT OF ARTICLE:
 1.  [Interview with Yuriy Pavlovich Kiyenko, deputy chairman of the
 USSR Council of Ministers' Main Administration of Geodesy and
 Cartography and chairman of the State Commission for Launches and Use
 of Cosmos-series, Resurs-type Satellites, by SELSKAYA ZHIZN
 correspondent V. Shcherban, under the rubric "Today is the Space
 Program Day " : "The Satellites Are Launched at Dawn..." ; first two
 paragraphs are source introduction]
 2.  [Text] For 16 years, there was an impenetrable shroud of secrecy
 surrounding him. All this time, his work was reported in the press
 dryly: "... the next satellite in the series was launched." And if
 they ever showed him on television, it was only from the back, and
 that just a glimpse. The chairman of the State Commission for
 Spacecraft Launches has always been a big secret. On the eve of the
 Space Program Day, we met with him. Just before the interview, he
 again called someone at the "top" and asked, "Then it's
 OK?.." --and, after hanging up the receiver, he said, "Well then,
 let's begin..."
 3.  Our interviewee is Yuriy Pavlovich Kiyenko, deputy chairman of
 the USSR Council of Ministers' Main Administration for Geodesy and
 Cartography and chairman of the State Commission for Launches and Use
 of Cosmos-series and Resurs-type Satellites. He is over 50 years of
 3"
 Approved for Release
 - n 6 UNCLASSIFIED          ~ ~~
 C00175709
 UNCLASSIFIED
 Page: 5     of 63
 Concatenated JPRS Reports, 1990
 Document 5 of 16                                                 Page   2
 age. A hale man of few words. During the year, he spends many a day
 roaming the cosmodromes. The satellites he has launched have never
 fallen back to earth or exploded, and they have sent billions of
 pieces of information from orbit. He has written more than 100
 scientific articles and is an Honored Scientist and Engineer.
 4.  [Shcherban] Yuriy Pavlovich, every now and then there are reports
 in the newspapers about the satellite launches. And behind all of
 them stands a mysterious figure--you. What kind of work does the
 state commission chairman do?
 5.  [Kiyenko] It is somewhat odd that I am of interest to you. I am
 neither a cosmonaut nor a general designer. I am a civilian. The
 state commission chairman coordinates and supervises the operations
 associated with the testing and use of space equipment. An enormous
 number of people participate in those operations. The information
 needed for making a decision about launching a space vehicle and for
 supporting the work during the flight converges at the chairman's
 desk.  Accordingly, he alone bears all the responsibility for how a
 launch will go and for the safety of the people...
 6.  [Shcherban] It is only recently that we have begun to learn the
 truth about the launches of manned spacecraft.  Along with the
 successes in that area, there have also been failures: people have
 died, and crews have returned from orbit with nothing... But there
 has never been any such information about the launches of the robot
 satellites. There has been total silence on that score.
 7.  [Kiyenko] It's no secret that work with space equipment is
 dangerous. Very complicated situations come up. But I have never been
 involved in a single instance in which someone has died or has
 received a serious injury. So if you are expecting "sizzling"
 facts, then, I'm afraid I'll disappoint you. Space robot
 systems--unlike a human, who has one head, one heart, and two
 hands--all have one, two or even three back-up systems. That is why
 the space robots are more reliable. Man is needed in space for
 testing new equipment and for conducting unique experiments. When all
 the bugs have been worked out, then the automated equipment
 successfully replaces man. Although, even I have had some emergency
 situations come up. I have had to postpone launches when I didn't
 received absolute assurance that systems would work efficiently or
 when flight programs needed to be adjusted. Once, we discovered one
 person missing among the evacuated participants in a launch. The
 launch had to be put on hold. We organized a search party for the
 missing person. He had been sleeping quite comfortably in a safe area
 the whole time.
 8.  [Shcherban] What's the result of delaying a launch for a minute?
 C00175709
 Page: 6     of 63
 Concatenated JPRS Reports, 1990
 Document 5 of 16                                                 Page   3
 9.  [Kiyenko] In such an extremely complicated matter, the slightest
 interruption leads to an unbalancing of the system. Which means that
 there is a lesser degree of probability that we can produce the
 needed results. A whole set of research operations must be performed
 to determine the launch time. The entire collective really gets
 "thrown off" whenever there is any kind of delay during a launch.
 10.  (Shcherban] Every time spacecraft are launched, the specialists
 assert that it will facilitate the development of the national
 economy. What kind of return have your spacecraft given to the
 national economy?
 11.  [Kiyenko] It is difficult to state precise sums in rubles, since
 the application of space technology is multifaceted.  Well, for
 example, to make a map or to study the ecological situation in a
 given region, an airplane can be used, or a satellite. The
 space-derived information will be 3-4 times cheaper than that derived
 by airplane. But how many millions is the recent discovery from orbit
 of the causes of the Aral Sea catastrophe worth? These days, the
 Ministry of Land Reclamation and Water Resources and the agricultural
 industry are rightly being named as the primary culprits in the
 drying up of the Aral. But it turns out that they are not the only
 ones at fault. In the middle reaches of the Amu-Darya and Syr-Darya
 rivers, the earth's crust is sinking. And at the mouths of ose
 rivers, it is rising.
 12.  The difference in elevation between the mouth and the middle
 reaches changes by 10-15 millimeters a year.  Nature is building a
 dam naturally at a rate of 1.5 meters a century! Underground aquifers
 have enormous reserves of fresh and slightly mineralized water. If
 the Aral Sea today has 450 cubic kilometers of water, the underground
 geological lenses beneath the middle reaches of the rivers have
 accumulated something on the order of 20,000 cubic kilometers. This
 will help solve the region's ecological problem! It will means
 billions of rubles saved!
 13.  And what about satellite prospecting for oil, gas and coal?
 Drilling just one dry well means millions of rubles down the drain.
 And what about controlling desertification? It was established from
 orbit that, in Kalmykia, 40,000-45,000 hectares of land per year are
 becoming unusable because the land is being covered with sand, and
 the reason for that--overgrazing by cattle. And what about the number
 of underground water deposits that have been found? Satellites have
 identified hundreds of thousands of hectares of eroded soil. If it
 weren't for them and the measures taken thanks to them, you and I
 would have no bread at all...
 C00175709
 Page: 7     of 63
 Concatenated JPRS Reports, 1990
 Document 5 of 16                                                 Page   4
 14.  [Shcherban] I would love to share your optimism. But here among
 the people far from space a somewhat different opinion has formed
 regarding its development.   It's no accident that demands have been
 voiced at the Congress of People's Deputies for a reduction in the
 allocations for space... There was no sausage or butter in the
 pre-space era, and there's still none. Even though more and more
 satellites are being launched. Might it not make sense to reconfigure
 them and to concentrate on solving the problems of today? I believe
 that people would vote for that with both hands.
 15.  [Kiyenko] Well, first of all, the launches of space vehicles are
 not increasing. Just the opposite. And that's not because we are
 becoming convinced of the flights' ineffectiveness.  The reduction is
 happening because they are becoming more effective and are lasting
 longer...
 16.  Let's imagine for a just moment that we abandoned the use of
 satellites and that we plunked down those millions for the purchase
 of meat. We would reduce substantially the effectiveness of the
 operations for investigating the country's natural economic
 potential. At present, space-derived information forms the basis of
 operations involving the search for raw materials and the study and
 inventory of the country's forests. That information is important for
 the study of agricultural resources and se  mic hazards ..and for the
 analysis of the engineering and geological conditions in areas that
 have nuclear electric power plants... I could continue the list ad
 infinitum. We would lose much, much more than we would gain if we
 abandoned the space programs.
 17.  It's another matter that the data from space-derived information
 is underused. And that use, basically, only for the development of
 industry. Agriculture is receiving only a miserly portion of the
 space pie. And yet, information that is of value to agriculture is
 being passed on regularly to the agricultural industry. For example,
 a comprehensive study of natural resources was recently conducted in
 the Central Asian republics. In arid places, we found lands with good
 forage resources, and we mapped them out.
 18.  [Shcherban] Mapped them out? No matter how many kolkhoz and
 sovkhoz representatives I questioned at the local level about how
 they are using the materials of space surveys, they just shrugged
 their shoulders: they hadn't heard a thing about it. Most of them
 don't even know what it is.
 19.  [Kiyenko] Well, I don't know whom you talked to there...  Is it
 really necessary to get the space-survey results to the farm
 managers? It's the land-use surveyors in the oblasts and the
 republics who should be familiar with them. But you are right in
 C00175709
 Page: 8     of 63
 Concatenated JPRS Reports, 1990
 Document 5 of 16                                                Page   5
 saying that the farm managers are not very interested in the space
 information. Moreover, there is a certain pessimism in their attitude
 toward it.  Why? The main reason lies in the ineffectiveness of the
 existing mechanism for introducing what is new. The system operates
 in such a fashion that people are not interested in what is new,
 because, after its introduction, they receive a smaller wage.
 20.  The space program must be viewed as a locomotive which is
 pulling behind itself a long train of basic and applied sciences. If
 all the achievements we have brought back from space were introduced
 today, then there is no doubt that an enormous economic impact would
 be felt in many sectors of the national economy.
 21.  [Shcherban] Each new launch of a spacecraft, it is asserted,
 produces wounds in the ozone layer which do not heal for a long time.
 And if you consider the fact that we are launching hundreds of space
 facilities, then that very layer reminds me personally of a sieve.
 Does the chairman of the state commission have his deputy for ecology
 close at hand? And, in general, is any one determining the effect of
 the space launches on the environment?
 22.  [Kiyenko] The rockets which we use to place the Cosmos and
 Resurs satellites into orbit are ecologically clean.  And they do no
 harm to the ozone layer. They discharge a smaller amount of
 combustion products than do the automobiles of an average-sized city.
 And, in general, it one can't that a rocket punches a hole in the
 ozone layer. No one has ever even recorded such phenomena above the
 cosmodromes. And, with regards to the deputy...  During launches of
 space vehicles for the study of natural resources, I have close at
 hand specialists from the Priroda State Center, who, believe me, know
 what's what in ecology matters.
 23.  [Shcherban] As chairman of the state commission, you know better
 than anyone else what the bill is for spacecraft launches. Couldn't
 you cite a couple of figures from this document?
 24.  [Kiyenko] Resurs-F, when it completed its program, produced an
 economic impact of 20 million [rubles].  That exceeded the. cost of
 the vehicle, the rocket, and the launch many times over.
 25.  [Shcherban] Many of our readers are convinced that the entire
 space armada circling our globe serves, to a large extent, the
 interests of the military-industrial complex.  In the final analysis,
 majors and colonels aren't launched into space so they can observe
 from orbit how the winter sown crops have sprouted, are they? For
 what purpose, it is being asked, have we achieved the world's highest
 resolution with our cameras--down to 5 meters--which can be used to
 view the wheat crops in detail from space...
 C00175709
 UNCLASSIFIED
 Page: 9     of 63
 Concatenated JPRS Reports, 1990
 Document 5 of 16                                                 Page   6
 26.  [Kiyenko] The satellites which are being placed into orbit under
 the supervision of our state commission are intended solely for
 solving national economy problems.  It is peaceful technology. And by
 the way, thatspace armada, as you call it, is more like a small
 flotilla in comparison with the one which is working for all the
 other sectors. We cannot even satisfy the demands of our consumers.
 Throughout the country, more than 1,100 organizations use space
 survey materials to solve approximately 300 national economy
 problems. At customers' requests, we are passing on as much as a
 million pieces of space information. We are supplying it to more than
 60 countries around the world for hard currency.  And it's only
 because of the shortage of space equipment that we can't saturate the
 domestic and foreign markets with its products.
 27.  If we want to have enough sausage and enough butter, then we
 should talk about increasing that armada.  Indeed, the demand is
 therei Just-one space photograph costs anywhere from $1,000 and
 $4,500. And as for the majors and colonels, I will say this: their
 training, skills, and reactions and the way they think are perfectly
 suited for ensuring that the expensive space missions are completed
 successfully.
 28.  [Shcherban] It sometimes happens that satellite fragments which
 have not completely burned up fall to Earth. They are quite often
 taken for UFOs. Such falls, so our readers assert, have recently
 become more frequent.  Incidentally, one such burned fragment, a
 spherical object, recently fell on a cornfield in Voronezh Oblast.
 Fortunately, no one was hit. Can you guarantee that some unburned
 chunk of space metal won't ever crash through the roof of someone's
 house somewhere?
 29.  [Kiyenko] I'd call that a loaded question. Yes, I do know of
 instances when remnants of spacecraft have returned to the ground
 against our wishes. They are, beyond all doubt, anomalies. Such
 instances have been written up both in our country and abroad. But in
 any specific instance, it must be determined what country the
 fragment belongs to. Our equipment has been designed so that nothing
 is supposed fall back to Earth and, if something does fall, that it
 does so in completely unpopulated areas.
 30.  [Shcherban] Incidentally, regarding unpopulated areas, from
 where are your satellites launched?
 31.  [Kiyenko] We prefer to operate from the Northern Cosmodrome in
 Arkhangelsk Oblast. During powered flight, the rocket flies over
 unpopulated areas: taiga, tundra, marshes, and the Arctic Ocean.
 Frequently, the launches take place at dawn.
 C00175709
 Page: 10    of 63
 Concatenated JPRS Reports, 1990
 Document 5 of 16                                                Page   7
 32.  If only you knew how beautiful the cosmodrome is at that time of
 day...

