 J re)
 1xot
 17 Uaroh 3660
 UPO'SStshted, 1 ote zupbed in Sweden; V deeutitied.   C-111te seer
 The full text, 'with the exception of the final paragraph, of an
 article on pokes 1 find 8 of the 8 March 2960 issue of the Stoc]dui
 daily, Dagens Nybetr, is given below. The article, which was entitled:
 "Light in Sky New Satellite, E.rparts Believe"t was accompanied by a
 photograph of the two L'r'0*s sighted by Ease Jansson mentioned in the
 "The luminous object which was observed shortly after 2000
 hours on 6 )Tarch.by the mew of the Sunddvall plane of Lin3eflyg
 [awe- sh airl  e], as, judging Srom all the circumstances, a
 ht..*erto :iiaidrnti?ied satellite.  The point of? light was also
 observed from the observatory in Saltsjoebaden.
 " 'I made the discovery just before, the object disappeared
 below the sort w.st horizon, states Docent Gunnar Larsson-Leader
 %estnsbly of the observatory.  It seemed to be a satellite and
 i as sure that it was not a shooting star or meteor.'
 "^awo unidentified f],ying objects were observed and pbotograpbod
 on the nornira of 6 March bar photographer Ease Janasoa of Norrtaelp.
 ae states that he bad gone out into a field early in the roraing
 photograpb the unidentified satellite, 2960 Alpha, which was expected
 00015447`
 Approved for Release
 91
 to pass the Stockholm latitude in a soatherly direction abort
 02  hours.  Between 0915 and 09O7 bows he observed two objects
 vbi,eb came from the north and weirs moving in a southeasterly
 direction. Their movement vas flow but otherwise initially
 was not entirely unlike that of the satellites he had seen before.
 Suddenly, however, the direction of movement changed, and the ob-
 jects turned such that they vere`goirg hick in the same direction
 they came from.  On one of his plates he even caught a third lams-
 "Xt bas not been possible to determine whether the observation
 is purely ancptical illusion or not. It can be added, however,
 that a resident of 3raam, Thorsten Haa'sanssbn, reports that
 between 0528 and 05343. hours on 6 March be saw the so-called phantom
 satellite, 1960        vtth binoculars through a window facing
 o= the vest. Bu'. in his case also the satellite moved a little
 peculiarly as seen from the observer's location:  'I observed
 the satellite in the north-northwest and it was moving in a
 horizontal direction . . . (but.) than it went straight down at a
 right angle and disappeared.'"
 The sighting by the crew of the Sundsvall bound sirpiane.mentioned
 above was originally reported in Degens Nyheter of 7 March, page 9, under
 the titls "Novena Light Phenomenon Is believed to Be Satellite". The
 full test of that article follows.
 "Jlceord ng to a radio report to Hidlanda Airport outside
 C00015447
 SundavaU, an unidentified lusinons object, psobsbiy a sats1llts.,
 Vag sighted trop oar of Linj~s regular planes on roots from
 "Air Captain Maurits Esmx'in, captain-of Linjsfb'g'a regular
 evsaing plans to Suadavall, said late in the evening of 6 March
 that, 'It vas just after 2000 hours Swedish ti . that Copilot
 lueU Vera reported a bright luminous object on a genersl7y north-
 vesterly cowse.' He (Hearin] thinks that there is hardly sn r great
 doubt that it via sans toss of satellite.
 "Light phencaena which may origiaste from a satellite have
 also been observed over Stockholm. It vas reported to Dagms ftbsteer
 *xam lidingoe that on two evenings in succession a moving point of
 light bad been observed at 2230 hours in a south-sout&+esterly
 direction and 33 to 20 degrees above the horizon.

