 C00174676
 Page: 22    of 27
 Concatenated JPRS Reports, 1993
 Document 19 of 19                                                Page   1
 Classification:   UNCLASSIFIED       Status:        [STAT]
 Document Date:    11 Jun 93          Category:      [CAT]
 Report Type:      JPRS report        Report Date:
 Report Number:    JPRS-TEN-93-019    UDC Number:
 Source Line:  93WN0465B Moscow ROSSIYSKIYE VESTI in Russian 11 Jun 93
 p 4
 Subslug:  [Articles contributed to Operation "Radiation-]
 FULL TEXT OF ARTICLE:
 1.  [Articles contributed to Operation "Radiation"]
 2.  [Text] We have received the first responses from readers and
 public ecological organizations to the appeal by "Retsept" to
 establish a complete bank of information on past and possible
 instances of radioactive contamination of the environment
 (ROSSIYSKIYE VESTI, No 96).  Operation "Radiation" is continuing.
 We are interested in eye-witness accounts of the burial of
 radioactive wastes, of accidents at nuclear facilities and
 installations, and of cases of careless storage and misappropriation
 of radioactive materials. These communications allow us to conduct
 publicly open_monitoring of_ the radiation situation in_the _cQUnsr~-_,____
 attracting the attention of the corresponding state bodies and the
 public to these problems.
 3.  "People Must Not Be Forced to Live in a Nuclear Home," by N.
 Mironova, coordinator of the "Nuclear Safety" movement, Chelyabinsk
 4.  It is difficult to overstate the importance of the problem raised
 by "Retsept." May God grant you the strength to take a sufficient
 number of steps along this road before someone forces you to stop.
 5.  The things that were done by the Ministry of Atomic Power and the
 Ministry of Health in the Urals can be compared only with Stalinist
 genocide. The criminal actions against morality and humanity
 committed here are just as serious as those addressed in Nuremberg.
 But there is little time to be digging into the past, because the
 present is even more dangerous and significantly more responsible for
 the effects it has upon the future.
 6.  Mountains of weapons have been forged in our country, and they
 are now playing an increasingly active role in "hot spots" in
 Russia. Obviously the critical mass has been exceeded. God forbid
 that this wave will engulf our nuclear potential.
 UNCLASSIFIED      Approve for Release
 C00174676
 Page: 23    of 27
 Concatenated JPRS Reports, 1993
 Document 19 of 19                                                Page   2
 7.  Our task is to reveal the full antihumanitarian nature of not
 only the use but even the production of nuclear weapons. It is
 precisely in the production stage that practical use of these weapons
 against the peoples of our country occurs. This happens through
 exposure of people to radioactive wastes dumped into the environment
 at the stage of weapon production, through the consequences of
 nuclear explosions carried out in the testing stage, through
 overexposure of personnel and soldiers during the stage of storage
 and salvage of nuclear weapons, and through the effects of so-called
 peaceful nuclear explosions that had been criminally permitted on
 Russian territory by the former Union government.  Nuclear uranium
 and plutonium technology is extremely dirty and dangerous. Its danger
 continues into the future, since radiation exposure weakens the
 immune system and distorts genetic codes.
 8.  Nuclear industry is insatiable. It requires increasingly larger
 capital investments, and material and human resources. Just in terms
 of capital outlays alone, 30 times more must be invested today than
 20 years ago in freely convertible currency (dollars) to satisfy the
 technical needs of nuclear power plants. Things have gotten even more
 expensive in the fuel cycle in regard to storage and handling of the
 large quantity of acidic highly radioactive wastes.
 9.  Can the population be excluded today from resolving the issues of
 its future coexistence with nuclear industry, can it be vassed__o_v_r,___________
 -- cants mood g----------- ticed, can the results of referendums be ignored?
 All of the people cannot be forced to live in a nuclear home. We will
 never become accustomed to having our children die as sacrifices
 brought before the nuclear altar.
 10.  All technology must be socially acceptable: Only this gives it
 the right to state financing, to the support of taxpayers, who are
 the ones who form the assets of the state. Social programs, both
 medical and educational, are also. financed from this same pocket. And
 when the state is unable to find the money for social protection, but
 offers interest-free loans for the construction. of the Southern Ural
 Nuclear Power Plant (134 billion rubles, or 10 times more than the
 cost of the state social program for the Ural region), the causes of
 this behavior by the government, its common sense and the influence
 of political and military groupings upon it naturally come into
 question.
 11.  "Can Catastrophe Be Predicted?" by N. Novgorodtsev, Tomsk
 12.  In July 1984, 2 years before the tragedy at the Chernobyl NPP,
 shop foreman Aleksandr Krasin had a nightmare about an explosion at
 the fourth power unit of the CNPP. Krasin didn't say anything about
 his dream to the power plant's leadership-he didn't want to end up in
 C00174676
 Concatenated JPRS Reports, 1993
 Page: 24    of 27
 Page   3
 a mental hospital. But what if he had attracted attention to his
 dream? It is said that dreams whose content is revealed never come
 true....
 13.  Two such accidents that never happened are described below. On
 12 February 1992 SOVETSKAYA ROSSIYA published an article by I. Zhukov
 titled "Alarm Predicted," which made references to the "St.
 Petersburg departments" that ridiculed with relish the unsuccessful
 forecasters, calling them "publicity-seeking UFO watchers," and
 asserted that the leadership of the Leningrad Nuclear Power Plant was
 intending to go to the procurator about the alarming rumors spread by
 K. Butusov, the leader of the team of UFO researchers. The
 interesting question is this: How far did the leadership get before
 24 March, when the third power unit of the Leningrad Nuclear Power
 Plant underwent an emergency shut-down, in which radioactive products
 were released into the atmosphere?
 14.  Note that information about the forthcoming accident was made
 public, the most persistent public attention was directed at it, and
 the accident did not occur at the predicted time. And the fact that
 it happened later on anyway permits the suggestion that attraction of
 attention to it   "   forced" it to proceed according to a "milder"
 scenario. We find confirmation of this suggestion, which appears
 strange at first glance, in an analysis of the Tomsk accident.
 ----------- --------------
 --15" The Siberian Chemical Works, which produce weapon-grade
 plutonium, are located in the city of Tomsk-7, less than 30
 kilometers from the oblast center of Tomsk. The accident that
 occurred in 1993 in the radiochemical plant of these works caused the
 entire world to shudder: "A second Chernobyll " the newspaper
 headlines shouted. It was soon revealed that the newspapers had
 overreacted somewhat, but who is about to throw stones at them,
 considering that everyone remembers the criminal way in which the
 scale of the Chernobyl catastrophe was concealed, causing people to
 mistrust official information for a long time to come? And besides
 that, many still have memories of the terrible rumors about an
 impending superlarge accident at the Siberian Chemical Works.
 16.  Beginning in October 1989, Tomsk was literally engulfed by a
 wave of hysteria regarding an impending nuclear explosion at Tomsk-7.
 The local newspapers published numerous articles on this topic.
 17.  These rumors did not circulate in Tomsk alone. I personally
 heard them in Moscow at the " Bioenergoinform-89 " conference in fall
 1989 from Eduard Yermilov, chairman of the Nizhegorod section of the
 Commission to Study Anomolous Phenomena under the All-Union Council
 of Scientific and Technical Societies, who reported that according to
 information received by the commission, Natalya P., a medium from the
 C00174676
 Page: 25    of 27
 Concatenated JPRS Reports, 1993
 Document 19 of 19                                          Page   4
 city of Pavlodar, who cited "extraterrestrial sources," prophesied
 a grandiose explosion in Tomsk (10 Chernobyls!).
 18.  The date of the impending catastrophe was invariably set in
 April 1990, although the date of the Tomsk explosion was predicted in
 Novosibirsk as April 1993. Careful research on the sources of the
 rumors, which we conducted in late 1989 and early 1990, shoved them
 to be completely identical with the sources of the rumors that
 engulfed the USA on the wave of the 20th cycle of solar activity and
 were brilliantly described by John Kil [transliteration] in the book
 "UFO-Operation Trojan Horse." Kil distinguished four sources of
 rumors in the book-clairvoyants, mediums, spirits and hippies (an
 altered state of conscidusness). We revealed four sources of rumors
 in Tomsk as well.
 19.  The first source consisted of clairvoyants and sensitives.  The
 newspapers cited authoritative prophets, particularly the prediction
 made by Vanga from Bulgaria. When asked about it, Vanga rejected this
 prediction outright.  On the other hand Viktor Vostokov, a doctor of
 Tibetan medicine, who had predicted the Kishinev earthquake and the
 "Nakhimov " disaster, cautiously noted in a certain interview in
 response to a question from a correspondent regarding future
 surprises that he was very troubled by the Tomsk Nuclear Power Plant,
 that something might possibly go wrong there.
 ------ --------- - 20   Another source was mediums. In August 1989 Viktor L., the chief
 engineer of the Tomsk Aviation Sports Club, took part in ferrying an
 An-2 from Kharkov to Tomsk.  During the flight, under strange
 circumstances he had telepathic contact with "aliens," who told him
 of the catastrophe that was to befall Tomsk-7 on the first of April
 1990.
 21.  Can we make use of such prognostic information obtained by such
 unusual means? Mankind has wrestled with this since ancient times. It
 would be sufficient to recall the temples of Asclepius, where every
 person maintaining a vigil cloaked in skins had the chance to receive
 a healing prescription during his sleep from Asclepius himself.
 22.  More up-to-date concepts of prediction are being developed
 today.  Many groups of specialists are working today in our country
 on extrasensory predictions.  Impressive results have been achieved
 in a number of cases, but on the average, barely one out of every
 forty registered predictions is confirmed. Nonetheless, scientists
 are attempting to lift the veil of secrecy from the mechanism of
 acquiring prophetic information, including for preventing industrial
 catastrophes.
 23.  "A Settlement With a Uranium View," by V. Anufriyeva, Kirov
 C00174676
 Page: 26    of 27
 Concatenated JPRS Reports, 1993
 Document 19 of 19                                                Page   5
 24.  The settlement of Karintorf, near Kirovo-Chepetskiy, which was
 founded by peat diggers back before the war, discovered that it
 neighbored upon a uranium deposit.
 25.  Of course the concentration of uranium in the ore is negligible,
 but the settlement's inhabitants do have grounds for concern.
 26.  "They knew about the uranium since the 1960s, and they kept
 silent about it for 30 years, and they would have continued to keep
 silent about it as long as nothing went wrong. And in the meantime we
 became something like experimental rabbits: They take blood samples,
 make some sort of immunizations, and hang dosimeters in our homes,"
 Aleksandr Sabrekov, the settlement's commandant, complained with,
 irritation.
 27.  The deposit is located only 2 or 3 kilometers from a residential
 area. Before, there used to be peat digs here, while now there is a
 field overgrown with brush. When I turned on my instrument, the
 pointer fluctuated between 6 and 8 microroentgens. As we moved off
 the road the pointer reached the 10 mark. On a thawed patch of dead
 grass it jumped to 15 R/hr. This was as high as it went.  Wherever I
 turned, and wherever I lowered my "mine detector," the pointer
 never rose above this mark. Does it make sense to raze settlement No
 2 of Karintorf, as recommended byassociates of the All-Russian
 ---Geologfcai Scientific-Research Institute imeni Karpinskiy, who
 surveyed the uranium deposit? By the way, in response to them, a
 report by V. G. Dvernitskiy, a scientist from the St. Petersburg
 radioecological department, and E. Ya. Yakhnin, a prominent
 geochemist with Sevzapekologiya, referred to this conclusion as
 "surprising." They feel that the "recommendation (regarding the
 razing of settlement No 2-V.A.)  cannot be taken seriously, and it
 does not provide any grounds for stopping life as usual in the
 settlement." Another review of the research by the geologists came
 from Moscow. It was written by scientists of the department of
 radiation hygiene of the Central Institute for Advanced Training of
 Physicians-Professor V. Ya. Golikov, a member of the Russian
 Scientific Commission on Radiation Safety, and docent S. I. Ivanov.
 "We feel that the conclusions and suggestions spelled out by the
 authors in paragraph 3 of the conclusions (the reference is to razing
 settlement No 2-V.A.)  are unsubstantiated and deeply wrong."
 28.  Specialists of the oblast's center for state public health
 inspection, who had doubts about the validity of the conclusions of
 the geologists and who sent their report out for review, turned out
 to be right: The danger was exaggerated, and there was no reason to
 move the inhabitants. But experts can vary in their opinions, and
 perhaps it wouldn't hurt to take another look. The fate of settlement
 C00174676
 Concatenated JPRS Reports, 1993
 Document 19 of 19
 Page: 27    of 27
 Page   6
 No 2 of Karintorf will depend in many ways on measurements of the
 concentration of radon in the homes and an evaluation of their
 health. And for the time being, radiation monitoring has been
 established in regard to food products, drinking water and the
 gamma-background of both settlements belonging to the enterprise in
 Karintorf.
 29.  "Volga in a Ring of Nuclear Power Plants," by Professor S.
 Butkov, chairman of the department of economic and social geography
 of the Ulyanovsk Pedagogical Institute
 30.  The Kalinin, Kostroma, Gorkiy, Tatar, Bashkir, Dimitrovgrad and
 Balakov nuclear power plants are operating, under construction or
 planned for construction in the Volga-Kama basin.
 31.  The Scientific Research Institute of Atomic Reactors (NIIAR) has
 been working in the city of Dimitrovgrad since 1961. It contains
 eight reactors, of which five are scientific and three are
 semi-industrial. Seven reactors are in operation. The output of the
 nuclear power plant is 440,000 kilowatts. The NIIAR has 16 permanent
 observation posts, including two in Ulyanovsk. Radioactive wastes are
 pumped into the ground to a depth of 1,100-1,500 m. A
 high-temperature reactor to be used to process depleted fuel was to
 be built in this city as well.  The reactor needed around 100,000
 tonnes of high-quality graphite.  Its erection would have appraxlmately a trillion rubles  worth of foreign currency.  Because
 we do not have the needed quantity of graphite and the corresponding
 amount of money, the reactor was rejected.
 32.  Radioactive neutron sources will be produced in Dimitrovgrad
 jointly with the Chinese Atomic Energy Institute. The Chinese side
 intends to supply the products to countries in Asia and the Near
 East. The "radioactive dirt" will remain in Russia.
 33.  In order to replenish the continually growing shortage of
 electric and thermal energy, scientists propose erecting an
 experimental industrial unit of a new generation on the grounds of
 the NIIAR in place of the reactor facility being decommissioned. Its
 output would be 620,000 kilowatts of electric power and up to 215
 gigacalories of thermal energy per hour.
 34.  Some of the nuclear power plants in the Volga region were built
 on ground that is unsuitable in geological respects, and even simply
 dangerous, often in direct proximity to active faults, and at the
 intersections of river systems, where an abundance of water is
 observed.  Consequently we risk a misfortune on the Volga that would
 be dozens of times more terrible than Chernobyl.

