 C00175460
 Page: 9     of 13
 CLAS UNCLASSIFIED
 CLAS UNCLASSIFIED
 APO PM2007122593
 DRAT 930708
 SLIM Moscow Russian Television Network in Russian 1430 GMT 8 Jul 93
 SUBS [From the "M-Trust" program: Report over video of Saratov Aviation Plant;
 figures in brackets denote broadcast time in GMT in hours, minutes, and
 seconds
 SURJ Saratov Plant's Successes, Future Plans Reported
 Full Text Supersone of Message
 1   1
 2   [Excerpt) [143418] [Correspondent over video of gutted production
 premises) It appears that if you are considering production retooling, it
 should be global; if you are going to reconstruct, you should do it
 comprehensively.  This is what has been decided at the Saratov Aviation
 Plant.  And this is not surprising.  Everyone would like to have
 computerized production facilities, everyone would like to have modern
 production lines up to world standards rather than having to tinker with
 obsolete equipment.  Thus it is not difficult to understand the plant's
 management.  They are tired of selling aircraft at dumping prices, when
 retooling opens up the rare opportunity of introducing [quality]
 certification of all the individual links of the production process, thus
 enabling them not just to sell aircraft to other countries, but also to
 flood the market with own-production, high-quality spare parts.  This is
 why the itinerant session of the Ministry of Science Collegium-has
 approved the Saratov plant management's plan.  [video shows Collegium
 members inspecting production facilities]
 3    [Correspondent over video of Saratov riverside and Yak aircraft] The
 Saratov Aviation Plant, or SAZ for short, produces civilian Yak-40 and
 Yak-42 aicraft.  Thanks to their reliability and excellent specifications,
 these aircraft are much in demand on the domestic and the international
 markets.  For example, the 120-seat Yak-42, which is the most reliable
 aircraft in its class, is very popular with Italian, Indian, Egyptian,
 Iranian, Chinese, and other airlines.  It is worth mentioning that the
 sale of one such aircraft abroad is equivalent to the sale of 15,000 VAZ
 cars.
 4   People at the plant believe that, in order to meet domestic and foreign
 demand, they need radical retooling based on ecologically-clean, and
 energy- and resource-saving technologies.  These breakthrough
 technologies, coupled with new methods of production organization and
 production management, will enable the plant to increase its aircraft
 production at least tenfold.
 5    The creation of this type of production facilities is also the aim of the
 "Technologies and Production of the Future" state scientific and technical
 program of the Russian Ministry of Science and Technology Policy. [143600]
 [video shows Saratov Aviation Plant production facilities, ministry
 delegation inspecting plant, various aspects of Yak aircraft, more
 extensive views of production facilities)
 6   [passage omitted -- interview with Russian Minister of Science and
 Technology Policy B.G. Saltykov]
 7   [1439371 [Correspondent over video of production facilities] The main
 demand made on certified output is that it guarantees a pre-set high
 standard of quality and takes consumer requirements into account.  The
 aviation equipment and new types of aircraft, for example with aerodynamic
 bodies which are being built at the Saratov Aviation Plant, are already
 ~3l
 Approved for Release
 COO 17 5 4 6 O ag world quality standards.  A planned database will make i t
 possible to coordinate output quality with the requirements of specific
 clients.  [143959] [video shows production facilities, part-built
 aircraft]
 8    [passage omitted -- demonstration of high-precision machine tool
 incorporating laser-scale and automated buggy for transporting components]
 9    (144121] [Correspondent over video of delegation inspecting the plant's
 "flying saucer"] There is no doubt about it, the our entire camera crew
 was very eager to see and film the Saratov Aviation Plant's most unusual
 design -- the "flying saucer." The "flying saucer" needs no airfield.  It
 can take off and land with the help of an air cushion on land, on water,
 on snow, and in the mountains.  The sphere of application of the Saratov
 "flying saucer"-will be very wide-ranging.  It will be able to carry
 passengers and cargo, help fight fires, prospect for minerals, and ensure
 normal working conditions for members of expeditions to inaccessible areas
 and in extreme weather conditions.
 10    Work on the assembly of the new-generation flying apparatus is continuing.
 [144155] (video shows model and various aspects "flying saucer" being
 assembled]
 11    [144156 thru 144400 -- passage omitted on interview with Academician V.N.
 Petrichenko of the Ministry of Science on quality control] (endall) 081430
 20/1242z Jul WC 669 BT #9848 NNNN

