 C00175720
 Page: 85    of 86
 Concatenated JPRS Reports, 1991
 Document 10 of 10                                                Page
 Classification:   UNCLASSIFIED       Status:        [STAT]
 Document Date:    17 Mar 91          Category:      [CAT]
 Report Type:      JPRS Report        Report Date:
 Report Number:    JPRS-TEN-91-007    UDC Number:
 Headline:  Arkhangelsk To Undergo Satellite Survey
 Source Line:  LD1703115391 Moscow All-Union Radio Mayak Nework in
 Russian 0640 GMT 17 Mar 91
 FULL TEXT OF ARTICLE:
 1.  [Text] [Announcer] The Cosmodrome and the Far North is the
 subject of a report by our correspondent, Valentin Bogomolov.
 2.  [Bogomolov] On clear, cloudless nights the citizens of
 Arkhangelsk sometimes see rockets rising into the sky above the city.
 Occasionally they are mistaken for UFOs but, at all events, everybody
 here knows that the world's busiest space launch site, Plesetsk, lies
 right next door to Arkhangelsk. But what benefit do Arkhangelsk
 Oblast and the Far North, which lie under the rockets' flight path,
 derive from the Cosmodrome? This is the question we put to Col. Grin,
 one of its commanders
 3.  [Begin recording] [Grin] Recently we launched the Informator
 spacecraft. This is the first experiment in a series intended to test
 ways of maintaining communications with remote regions of the
 country, with settlements, with geological prospecting teams, with
 those regions and installations within the country where the use of
 traditional means of communication is inappropriate and economically
 unviable.
 4.  Recently, at the end of December, we signed an agreement on the
 launch of the Resurs spacecraft, which is designed to survey the
 earth's mineral resources and carry out ecological monitoring. In
 other words, it will carry out a comprehensive survey of Arkhangelsk
 Oblast in the interests of the national economy. It will study the
 location of mineral resources, the use of timber resources, and the
 ecological situation in Arkhangelsk Oblast.
 5.  [Bogomolov] I know that geologists are obliged to acquire
 satellite charts from the Americans. Can't they see your space
 photographs?
 6.  [Grin] Of course they can. Furthermore, as a deputy in the oblast
 soviet, I took part in this work. Maps compiled from satellite
 measurements, including ones of other oblasts of the Soviet Union,
 were displayed at a session of the oblast soviet. Some of these
 measurements were taken during orbits over oblasts which neighbor
 114
 UNCLASSIFIED        Approved or Release
 ~.2OI
 C00175720
 Page: 86    of 86
 Concatenated JPRS Reports, 1991
 Document 10 of 10                                                Page   2
 Arkhangelsk Oblast.
 7.  [Bogomolov] Here is what Gen. Oleynik, the commander of the
 Cosmodrome, had to say about the benefit which Arkhangelsk Oblast
 derives from the Cosmodrome.
 8.  [Begin recording] [Oleynik] The program can be adjusted to find
 out how man's activity is affecting the environment in Arkhangelsk
 Oblast, where the ecological situation has deteriorated lately. But I
 do not know the activities of the Cosmodrome for this. Rather it is
 the fault of industrial enterprises located in Arkhangelsk Oblast.
 Our spacecraft will be able to assess the extent of air and water
 pollution, the state of forestry plantations, and the state of the
 soil. We will also be able to measure the impact of human activities
 in our region on the ozone layer.
 9.  [Bogomolov] But isn't this very expensive? Every launch costs
 many millions of rubles.
 10.  [Oleynik] The life of man and the future of the region are more
 important than the money we plan to spend on this reserch. [end
 recording]
 11.  [Announcer] I wholly agree with that last remark. I remind you
 that the life of man is more precious than the money s en  on
 scientific research, especially as the next generation, in other
 words our children, is at stake. One hopes that our small loved ones
 will be able to eat clean food, swim in clean rivers, and breathe
 clean air. If they do, maybe they will be morally better than us. One
 very much hopes so.

